AMERICAN
COLLEGE
OF
FOUNDED
SPORTS
1954
MEDICINE
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
AMERICAN COLLEGE
of SPORTS MEDICINE
Progression Models in
Resistance Training
for Healthy Adults
SUMMARY
POSITION STAND
In order to stimulate further adaptation toward specific training goals,
progressive resistance training (RT) protocols are necessary. The optimal
characteristics of strength-specific programs include the use of concentric
(CON), eccentric (ECC), and isometric muscle actions and the performance
of bilateral and unilateral single- and multiple-joint exercises. In addition, it
is recommended that strength programs sequence exercises to optimize the
preservation of exercise intensity (large before small muscle group
exercises, multiple-joint exercises before single-joint exercises, and
higher-intensity before lower-intensity exercises). For novice (untrained
individuals with no RT experience or who have not trained for several
years) training, it is recommended that loads correspond to a repetition
range of an 8-12 repetition maximum (RM). For intermediate (individuals
with approximately 6 months of consistent RT experience) to advanced
(individuals with years of RT experience) training, it is recommended that
individuals use a wider loading range from 1 to 12 RM in a periodized
fashion with eventual emphasis on heavy loading (1-6 RM) using 3- to
5-min rest periods between sets performed at a moderate contraction
velocity (1-2 s CON; 1-2 s ECC). When training at a specific RM load, it
is recommended that 2-10% increase in load be applied when the
individual can perform the current workload for one to two repetitions
over the desired number. The recommendation for training frequency is
2-3 dwk¹ for novice training, 3-4 d'wk¹ for intermediate training, and
4-5 dwk for advanced training. Similar program designs are recom-
mended for hypertrophy training with respect to exercise selection and
frequency. For loading, it is recommended that loads corresponding to
1-12 RM be used in periodized fashion with emphasis on the 6-12 RM
zone using 1- to 2-min rest periods between sets at a moderate velocity.
Higher volume, multiple-set programs are recommended for maximizing
hypertrophy. Progression in power training entails two general loading
strategies: 1) strength training and 2) use of light loads (0-60% of 1 RM for
lower body exercises; 30-60% of 1 RM for upper body exercises) performed
at a fast contraction velocity with 3-5 min of rest between sets for multiple
sets per exercise (three to five sets). It is also recommended that emphasis be
placed on multiple-joint exercises especially those involving the total body.
For local muscular endurance training, it is recommended that light to
moderate loads (40-60% of 1 RM) be performed for high repetitions (>15)
using short rest periods (<90 s). In the interpretation of this position stand as
0195-9131/09/4103-0687/0
MEDICINE & SCIENCE IN SPORTS & EXERCISE.Ⓡ
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine
DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181915670
This pronouncement was written for the American College of
Sports Medicine by Nicholas A. Ratamess, Ph.D.; Brent A. Alvar,
Ph.D.; Tammy K. Evetoch, Ph.D., FACSM; Terry J. Housh, Ph.D.,
FACSM (Chair); W. Ben Kibler, M.D., FACSM; William J. Kraemer,
Ph.D., FACSM; and N. Travis Triplett, Ph.D.
with prior ones, recommendations should be applied in context and should be
contingent upon an individual's target goals, physical capacity, and training
status. Key Words: strength, power, local muscular endurance, fitness,
functional abilities, hypertrophy, health, performance
INTRODUCTION
The current document replaces the American College
of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 2002 Position Stand entitled
"Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy
Adults" (8). The 2002 ACSM Position Stand extended the
resistance training (RT) guidelines initially established by
the ACSM in the position stand entitled "The Recommen-
ded Quantity and Quality of Exercise for Developing and
Maintaining Cardiorespiratory and Muscular Fitness, and
Flexibility in Healthy Adults" (7), which suggested the min-
imal standard of one set of 8-12 repetitions for 8-10 exer-
cises, including one exercise for all major muscle groups,
and 10-15 repetitions for older and more frail persons. The
2002 Position Stand (8) provided a framework for superior
training prescription guidelines relative to the need for pro-
gression in healthy (without disease or orthopedic limitations)
novice, intermediate, and advanced trainees. Specifically,
these guidelines effectively distinguished numerous modifi-
cations to the original guidelines to accommodate individuals
seeking muscular development beyond that of minimal
general health and fitness. Since 2002, numerous studies have
been published examining one or more RT variable(s) to sup-
port the progressive adaptation in muscular strength and per-
formance. These studies have identified other mechanisms
of physiological adaptations and have served to bolster the
scientific integrity of the RT knowledge base. As with all
position stands, interpretation of these revised recommenda-
tions should be applied in context and should be contin-
gent upon an individual's goals, physical capacity, and
training status.
Progression in RT may be defined as "the act of moving
forward or advancing toward a specific goal over time until
the target goal has been achieved," whereas maintenance
687
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
RT refers to programs designed to maintain the current level
of muscular fitness (8). Although it is impossible to improve
at the same rate over long-term periods (e.g., >6 months),
the proper manipulation of program variables (choice of
resistance, exercise selection and order, number of sets
and repetitions, frequency, and rest period length) can limit
training plateaus and increase the ability to achieve a higher
level of muscular fitness. Trainable characteristics include
muscular strength, power, hypertrophy, and local muscular
endurance (LME). Variables such as speed and agility,
balance, coordination, jumping ability, flexibility, and other
measures of motor performance may be enhanced by RT.
RT, when incorporated into a comprehensive fitness pro-
gram, improves cardiovascular function (72), reduces the
risk factors associated with coronary heart disease (89,130)
and non-insulin-dependent diabetes (184), prevents osteo-
porosis (163), may reduce the risk of colon cancer (146),
promotes weight loss and maintenance (61), improves dy-
namic stability and preserves functional capacity (61), and
fosters psychological well-being (62).
This position stand presents evidence-based guidelines
using The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (194)
criteria shown in Table 1. Each recommendation is given a
grade of A, B, C, or D based on the quantity and quality of
evidence.
PROGRESSION PRINCIPLES
The foremost principles of RT progression are progres-
sive overload, specificity, and variation (157). Countless RT
models can be effective if these principles are incorporated
and manipulated into the design. The magnitude of im-
provement depends upon the individual's training status and
genetic predisposition (8). Progressive overload is the grad-
ual increase of stress placed upon the body during exercise
training. Among untrained or novice populations, physio-
logical adaptations to an RT program may occur in a short
period. Systematically increasing the demands placed upon
the body is necessary for further improvement and may
be accomplished through altering one or more of the fol-
lowing variables: 1) exercise intensity (i.e., absolute or
relative resistance/load for a given exercise/movement) may
be increased; 2) total repetitions performed at the current
intensity may be increased; 3) repetition speed/tempo with
submaximal loads may be altered according to goals; 4) rest
periods may be shortened for endurance improvements or
lengthened for strength and power training; and 5) training
volume (total work represented as the product of the total
number of repetitions performed and the resistance) may be
gradually increased (e.g., 2.5-5% [75]) (Table 2).
Specificity. All training adaptations are “specific" to
the stimulus applied. The specific physiological adapta-
tions to RT are determined by various factors, including
1) muscle actions involved (56), 2) speed of movement
(39,44), 3) range of motion (145), 4) muscle groups trained
(156), 5) energy systems involved (259), and 6) intensity
and volume of training (225). Although there is some car-
ryover of training effects to other general fitness and per-
formance attributes, the most effective RT programs are
those that are designed to target-specific training goals.
Variation. Variation, or periodization, entails the sys-
tematic process of altering one or more program variable(s)
over time to allow for the training stimulus to remain
challenging and effective. Because the human body adapts
quickly to an RT program, at least some changes are needed
in order for continual progression to occur. It has been
shown that systematic variation of volume and intensity is
most effective for long-term progression (254). Variation
may take place in many forms and manifests by manip-
ulation of any one or a combination of the acute program
variables. However, the two most commonly studied
variables have been volume and intensity. The concept of
periodization was developed based on the studies of gen-
eral adaptation syndrome by Hans Selye (239) to optimize
performance and recovery (74,100). In addition to sport-
specific training, periodized RT has been shown to be
effective for recreational (54) and rehabilitative (67) ob-
jectives and is supported through a meta-analytical inves-
tigation to be superior to nonperiodized RT (223).
Classical periodization. The classic (linear) model of
periodization is characterized by high initial training
volume and low intensity, and as training progresses,
volume decreases and intensity gradually increases. This
traditional model of periodization is carried out to enhance
fundamental fitness variables through training in a desig-
nated succession to serve as an appropriate arrangement to
elicit "peak" performance of a distinct fitness variable (e.g.,
strength, rate of force development [RFD], and/or peak
power) for a precise and often narrow time window (74).
Most, but not all (14), studies have shown classic strength/
power periodized training to be superior to nonperiodized
RT for increasing maximal strength (e.g., 1 repetition
TABLE 1. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI; 194) evidence categories.
Category
Source of Evidence
Randomized control trials (RCT; rich body of data)
RCT (limited body of data)
A
B
с
CD
Nonrandomized trials, observational studies
Panel consensus judgment
Definition
Evidence is from well-designed RCT that provide a consistent pattern of findings in the population for which the
recommendation is made. Requires substantial number of studies involving substantial number of participants.
Evidence is from intervention studies that include only a limited number of RCT, post hoc or
subgroup analysis of RCT, or meta-analysis of RCT. Pertains when few randomized trials exist, they are small,
and the results are somewhat inconsistent or were from a nonspecific population.
Evidence is from outcomes of uncontrolled trials or observations.
Expert judgment is based on panel's synthesis of evidence from experimental research or the consensus of
panel members based on clinical experience or knowledge that does not meet the above-listed criteria.
688
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

maximum [RM] squat), cycling power, motor performance,
and jumping ability (252,254,272). It appears that longer
training periods (>6 months) may be necessary to under-
score the benefits of periodized training (273) because
periodized and nonperiodized training are effective during
short-term training. Important to periodization is the use of
rest days to allow recovery and to reduce the probability or
magnitude of overtraining (79).
Reverse periodization. A reverse linear periodiza-
tion model has also been studied (227). This model is the
inverse of the classical model in which intensity is initially
at its highest and volume at its lowest. Subsequently, over
an extended time, intensity decreases and volume increases
with each phase. This periodization model has been used
for individuals targeting local muscular endurance (LME)
enhancement (59) and was shown to be superior for en-
hancing LME to other periodization models when volume
and intensity were equated (227). Strength improvements
following this model have been shown to be lower com-
pared with linear and undulating models (227).
Undulating periodization. The undulating (nonlinear)
model of periodization enables variation in intensity and
volume within a cycle by rotating different protocols to
train various components of neuromuscular performance
(e.g., strength, power, LME). For example, in loading
schemes for core exercises (those exercises most specific to
target goals), the use of heavy, moderate, and light
resistances may be systematically or randomly rotated over
a training sequence, for example, 3-5 repetition maximum
(RM) loads, 8-10 RM loads, and 12-15 RM loads may
used in the rotation. This model has compared favorably
with linear periodized and nonperiodized multiple-set
models (14) and has been shown to produce superior
strength increases over 12 wk of RT compared with the
classical model (226). Further, this model has demonstrated
advantages in comparison to nonperiodized, low-volume
training in women (155,169). Few investigations have
evaluated the impact of undulating RT for multiple fitness
objectives (199). Most recently, this model has been
demonstrated superior over nonundulating RT for generat-
ing fitness and performance enhancement outcomes among
firefighter trainees (209).
TRAINABLE CHARACTERISTICS
Muscular Strength
The ability to generate force is necessary for all types of
movement. Muscle fiber cross-sectional area (CSA) is
positively related to maximal force production (71). The
arrangement of fibers according to their angle of pennation,
muscle length, joint angle, and contraction velocity can alter
the expression of muscular strength (95,145). Force
generation is further dependent upon motor unit activation,
and motor units are recruited according to their recruitment
threshold that typically involves the activation of the slower
(lower force-producing) motor units before the faster
(higher force-producing) units, that is, size principle (114).
Adaptations to RT enable greater force generation through
numerous neuromuscular mechanisms. Muscle strength
may increase significantly within the first week of training
(39), and long-term strength enhancement manifests itself
through enhanced neural function (e.g., greater recruitment,
rate of discharge) (234), increased muscle CSA (5,176,250),
changes in muscle architecture (138), and possible adapta-
tions to increased metabolites, for example, H+ (242), for
increased strength. The magnitude of strength enhancement
is dependent on the type of program used and the careful
prescription of muscle actions, intensity, volume, exercise
selection and order, rest periods between sets, and frequen-
cy (157).
Muscle Action
Most RT programs primarily include dynamic repetitions
with both concentric (CON; muscle shortening) and
eccentric (ECC; muscle lengthening) muscle actions,
whereas isometric (ISOM; no net change in muscle length)
actions play a secondary role (e.g., during nonagonist
muscle stabilization, core strength, grip strength, pauses
between ECC and CON actions, or specific agonist ISOM
exercises). Greater force per unit of muscle size is produced
during ECC actions (147) than either CON or ISOM
actions. Moreover, ECC actions require less motor unit
activation per specific load (147), are less metabolically
demanding (26), and are conducive to promoting hypertro-
phic adaptation (112) yet result in more pronounced
delayed onset muscle soreness (58) as compared with
CON actions. Dynamic CON muscular strength improve-
ment is greatest when ECC actions are included with CON
actions (56), and independently, ECC isokinetic training has
been shown to produce greater muscle action-specific
strength gains than CON training (64). The role of muscle
action manipulation during RT is minimal with respect to
overall progression because most programs include both
CON and ECC actions in a given repetition. However, the
inclusion of additional ISOM exercise may be beneficial. In
some programs, the use of different forms of ISOM
training, for example, functional ISOM (131) and supra-
maximal ECC actions (143), has been reported to produce
additional benefit. Specifically, certain ISOM actions have
been recommended for promoting low back health and have
been demonstrated effective for the selective recruitment of
postural, spinal-stabilization musculature (181).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For progression during RT for novice, intermedi-
ate, and advanced individuals, it is recommended that
CON, ECC, and ISOM muscle actions be included
(56,64,112,131,143).
Loading
Altering the training load affects the acute metabo-
lic (221), hormonal (151-154,158,159,165,219), neural
(96,235), and cardiovascular (72) responses to resistance
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise® 689
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

exercise. Depending on an individual's training experience
and current level of fitness, proper loading during RT
encompasses one or more of the following loading
schemes: 1) increasing load based on a percentage of 1
RM, 2) increasing absolute load based on a targeted
repetition number, or 3) increasing loading within a
prescribed zone (e.g., 8-12 RM). The load required to
increase maximal strength in untrained individuals is fairly
low. Loads of 45-50% of 1 RM (and less) have been
shown to increase dynamic muscular strength in previous-
ly untrained individuals (9,33,255,268). Light loads that
can be lifted a maximum of 15-25 repetitions have been
shown to increase strength in moderately trained individ-
uals (227). It appears greater loading is needed with
progression. At least 80% of 1 RM is needed to produce
further neural adaptations and strength during RT in
experienced lifters (96). Several pioneering studies indi-
cated that training with loads corresponding to 1-6 RM
(mostly 5-6 RM) was most conducive to increasing
maximal dynamic strength (22,201). Strength increases
have been shown to be greater using heavy weights for 3-
5 RM compared with 9-11 and 20-28 RM (33). Although
significant strength increases have been reported using
loads corresponding to 8-12 RM and lighter (33,149,250),
this loading range may be inferior for maximizing strength
in advanced lifters (96). Research examining periodized
RT has demonstrated a need for variable-intensity load-
ing schemes (74,223). Contrary to early suggestions of 6
RM loading, it appears that using a variety of training
loads is most conducive to maximizing muscular strength
(74). Meta-analytical data have shown that 60% of 1 RM
produced the largest effect sizes for strength increases in
novice individuals whereas 80% of 1 RM produced the
largest effect sizes for strength increases in trained in-
dividuals (225) and 85% of 1 RM was most effective in
athletes (206). For novice individuals, it has been sug-
gested that moderate loading (50-60% of 1 RM or less)
be used initially as learning proper form, and technique is
paramount. These dose-response data refer to average
training dosages, that is, mean loads used for all exercises.
Further, using a variety of loads appears to be most ef-
fective for long-term progression in muscular strength
(157). Recent studies have shown that self-selected RT
intensities are lower than what is recommended, for
example, 38-58% of 1 RM (76,87,222). Thus, intensity
needs to be prescribed above one's threshold (based on
targeted repetition number) for progression in experienced
populations.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that novice to intermediate
individuals train with loads corresponding to 60-70% of 1
RM for 8-12 repetitions and advanced individuals cycle
training loads of 80-100% of 1 RM to maximize muscular
strength (9,33,96,206,225,227,255,268).
Evidence category B. For progression in those individu-
als training at a specific RM load, it is recommended that a
2-10% (lower percent for small muscle mass exercises,
higher percent increase for large muscle mass exercises)
increase in load be applied when the individual can perform
the current workload for one to two repetitions over the
desired number on two consecutive training sessions (68).
Volume
Training volume is a summation of the total number of
repetitions performed during a training session multiplied
by the resistance used (kg) and is reflective of the duration
of which muscles are being stressed (262). Volume has
been shown to affect neural (102), hypertrophic (258),
metabolic (221), and hormonal (92,151,152,191,220)
responses and subsequent adaptations to RT. Altering
training volume can be accomplished by changing the
number of exercises performed per session, the number of
repetitions performed per set, or the number of sets per
exercise. Low-volume programs, for example, high load,
low repetitions, moderate to high number of sets, have been
characteristic of RT. Studies using two (55,170), three
(149,250), four to five (56,122), and six or more (123,236)
sets per exercise have all produced significant increases in
muscular strength in both trained and untrained individuals.
In direct comparison, studies have reported similar strength
increases in novice individuals between two and three sets
(35) and two and four sets (202), whereas three sets have
been reported superior to one and two (23). Although little
is known concerning the optimal number of sets performed
per muscle group per session, a meta-analysis of 37 studies
has shown that approximately eight sets per muscle group
produced the largest effect size in athletes (206,207).
Another aspect that has received considerable attention is
the comparison of single- and multiple-set programs. In many
of these studies, one set per exercise performed for 8-12
repetitions at a relatively slow velocity has been compared
with both periodized and nonperiodized multiple-set pro-
grams. A common criticism of these investigations is that the
number of sets per exercise was not controlled from other
variables such as intensity, frequency, and repetition velocity.
Notwithstanding this concern, most research investigations
comparing single- versus multiple-set training for muscular
fitness have examined the effects of a standard single-set
training program relative to that of any number of possible
multiple-set programs of varying intensity. This design has
made the process of identifying a clear-cut prescription re-
commendation very difficult because these studies have
yielded conflicting results. Several studies have reported
similar strength increases between single- and multiple-set
programs (40,132,248), whereas others reported multiple-set
programs superior (23,27,237,251,256) in previously un-
trained individuals. Since 2002, six studies have shown
multiple-set superiority for 33-100% of the dynamic
strength assessments used, whereas the remaining dynamic
strength assessments showed similar increases (81,126,
175,192,203,231). These data have prompted the notion that
untrained individuals respond favorably to both single- and
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
690
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

multiple-set programs and formed the basis for the popularity
of single-set training among general fitness enthusiasts (68).
In resistance-trained individuals, multiple-set programs have
been shown to be superior for strength enhancement (142,
149,155,160,228,238) in all but one study (110). Among
resistance-trained postmenopausal women, multiple-set train-
ing led to 3.5-5.5% strength increases, whereas single-set
training led to -1% to 2% strength reductions (142). No
comparative study has shown single-set training superior to
multiple-set training in trained or untrained individuals.
The results of meta-analytical studies have shown
multiple-set RT superior to single sets for strength enhance-
ment in untrained (224,225) and trained populations (224,
225,278) and superior for strength increases for programs
lasting 17-40 wk (278). These studies have shown that
performing three to four sets per exercise produced the most
substantial effect sizes (224,225). Thus, it appears that both
program types are effective for increasing strength in
untrained to moderately trained individuals during relatively
short-term training periods. Long-term studies support the
contention that a moderate increase in training volume is
needed for further improvement (27,224,225,278). How-
ever, there is a point where further increase in volume may
be counterproductive. In weightlifters, a moderate volume
was shown to be more effective for increasing strength
than low or high volumes of training with similar intensity
(90). The key factor may be variation of training volume
(and its interaction with intensity) rather than absolute
number of sets.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that one to three sets per
exercise be used by novice individuals initially (23,35,40,
55,132,170,202,206,207).
Evidence category B. For progression into intermediate to
advanced status, data from long-term studies indicate that
multiple sets be used with systematic variation of volume
and intensity over time (142,149,155,160,228,238). To re-
duce the risk of overtraining, a dramatic increase in volume
is not recommended. It is important to point out that not all
exercises need to be performed with the same number of
sets, and that emphasis of higher or lower volume is related
to the program priorities of the individual as well as the
muscle(s) trained in an exercise movement.
Exercise Selection
Both single- and multiple-joint exercises have been
shown to be effective for increasing muscular strength in
the targeted muscle groups using multiple modalities, for
example, free weights, machines, cords, etc. (47,157).
Multiple-joint exercises, such as bench press and squat,
require complex neural responses (37) and have generally
been regarded more effective for increasing overall muscu-
lar strength because they enable a greater magnitude of
weight to be lifted (253). Single-joint exercises, such as
knee extensions and knee curls, have been used to target-
specific muscle
groups and pose a reduced level of skill and
technical involvement. It is important to note that alterations
in body posture, grip, and hand width/foot stance and
position change muscle activation and alter the exercise.
Thus, many variations or progressions of single- and
multiple-joint exercises can be performed. Another way to
vary exercise selection is to include unilateral as well as
bilateral exercises. The level of muscle activation differs
when an exercise is performed bilaterally versus unilateral-
ly. Unilateral training may increase bilateral strength (in
addition to unilateral strength), and bilateral training may
increase unilateral strength (179). Unilateral training has
been shown to improve some aspects of sports performance,
such as single-leg jumping ability to a greater extent than
bilateral training (179). Of interest has been the perfor-
mance of single- and multiple-joint exercises in unstable
environments, for example, with stability balls, wobble
boards, and BOSU balls (144). These exercises have been
shown to increase the activity of lower torso musculature
and other stabilizer muscles (compared with stable environ-
ments); however, the magnitude of agonist force production
is considerably lower resulting in lighter weights lifted
(10,21). There are a multitude of exercises that can be
performed in a variety of conditions that leaves many
options for RT variation.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. Unilateral and bilateral single- and multiple-joint
exercises should be included in RT with emphasis on
multiple-joint exercises for maximizing overall muscle
strength in novice, intermediate, and advanced individuals
(33,96-107,113,118,120,149–157,169,172,176).
Free Weights and Machines
Weight machines have been regarded as safer to use, easy
to learn, and allow performance of some exercises that may
be difficult with free weights, for example, knee extension.
Machines help stabilize the body and limit movement about
specific joints involved in synergistic force production, and
machine exercises have demonstrated less neural activation
when matched for intensity for most comparisons to free-
weight exercises (178). Unlike machines, free weights may
result in a pattern of intra- and intermuscular coordination
that mimics the movement requirements of a specific task.
Both free weights and machines are effective for increasing
strength. Research shows that free-weight training leads to
greater improvements in free-weight tests and machine
training results in greater performance on machine tests
(30). When a neutral testing device is used, strength
improvement from free weights and machines appears
similar (274). The choice to incorporate free weights or
machines should be based on level of training status and
familiarity with specific exercise movements as well as the
primary training objective.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For novice to intermediate training, it is
recommended that free-weight and machine exercises are
included (30,169,172,178,248–250,274).
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise Ⓡ 691
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

Evidence category C. For advanced RT, it is recom-
mended that emphasis be placed on free-weight exercises
with machine exercises used to compliment program needs
(100-103,251).
Exercise Order
The sequencing of exercises significantly affects the acute
expression of muscular strength (240). This also applies
when exercises are sequenced based on agonist/antagonist
muscle group relationships. Muscle force and power may
be potentiated when opposing exercises (antagonist move-
ments) are performed (16); however, force and power may
be reduced if the exercises are performed consecutively
(171). Studies show that multiple-joint exercise (bench press,
squat, leg press, and shoulder press) performance declines
significantly when these exercises are performed later (af-
ter several exercises stressing similar muscle groups) rather
than early in a workout (244,245). Considering that these
multiple-joint exercises have been shown to be effective for
increasing strength, maximizing performance of these exer-
cises by performing them early in a workout may be nec-
essary for optimal strength gains (247).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category C. Recommendations for sequencing exercises for
novice, intermediate, and advanced strength training for total
body (all muscle groups trained in the workout), upper/lower
body split (upper-body musculature trained 1 d and lower-
body musculature trained another day), and muscle group split
(individual muscle groups trained during a workout) workouts
include large muscle group exercises before small muscle
group exercises, multiple-joint exercises before single-joint
exercises, higher-intensity exercises before lower-intensity
exercises, or rotation of upper and lower body or agonist-
antagonist exercises, that is, exercise performed for a muscle
group followed by an exercise for the opposing muscle group
(244,245).
Rest Periods
The amount of rest between sets and exercises signifi-
cantly affects metabolic (150,221), hormonal (158), and
cardiovascular (72) responses to an acute bout during
resistance exercise as well as performance of subsequent
sets (149,279) and training adaptations (212,230). Acute
resistance exercise performance may be compromised with
one versus 3-min rest periods (149), and strength recovery
may not be complete within 3 min (20). Several studies
have shown that the number of repetitions performed may
be compromised with short rest intervals, and 3- to 5-min
rest intervals produce less performance decrements than 30
s to 2 min (221,229,269–271). In untrained individuals,
circuit RT programs (using minimal rest in between
exercises) have been shown to produce modest increases
in strength (108). However, most longitudinal training
studies have shown greater strength increases with long
versus short rest periods (e.g., 2-5 min vs 30-40 s
[3,213,230]), and one study has shown a lack of strength
increase with 40-s rest periods (213). It is important to note
that rest period length will vary based on the complexity of
a given exercise (e.g., Olympic lifts and variations require
longer rest periods) and the primary objective for incorpo-
rating the exercise into the training program (i.e., not every
exercise will use the same rest interval).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category B. For novice, intermediate, and advanced training, it
is recommended that rest periods of at least 2-3 min be used
for core exercises using heavier loads (those exercises included
specifically to improve maximal strength such as the squat and
bench press) (3,149,213,214,221,229,230,269–271).
Evidence category C. For assistance exercises (those
exercises complimentary to core exercises), a shorter rest
period length of 1-2 min may suffice (149,213,229,
230,269).
Velocity of Muscle Action
The velocity of muscular contraction used to perform dy-
namic muscle actions affects the neural (97), the hypertrophic
(123,241), and the metabolic (17,173) responses to resistance
exercise and is inversely related to the relative load during
maximal muscle contractions (48,234). Isokinetic training
has been shown to increase strength specific to the training
velocity with some carryover in performance at other ve-
locities in the proximity to the training velocity (39,44,63,
123,137,145). However, it appears that training at moderate
velocity (180-240°-s¯¹) produces the greatest strength in-
creases across all testing velocities (137).
Dynamic constant external resistance (also called iso-
tonic) or isoinertial training poses a different stress. Sig-
nificant reductions in force production are observed when
the intent is to perform the repetition slowly with sub-
maximal loading. In interpreting the effects of intent to
perform slow repetitions, it is important to note that two
types of slow-velocity contractions exist during dynamic
RT, unintentional and intentional. Unintentional slow ve-
locities are used during high-intensity repetitions in which
either the loading or the fatigue is responsible for the rep-
etition tempo and duration (velocity of movement) (187).
Conversely, intentional slow-velocity contractions are used
with submaximal loads and occur when an individual has
greater control of the velocity and influences the time the
muscles are under tension.
It has been shown that CON force was significantly lower
for an intentionally slow velocity (5:5; e.g., 5-s CON, 5-s
ECC) compared with a traditional (moderate) velocity with a
corresponding lower level of neural activation, for example,
determined via electromyography (143). The rate of energy
expenditure is lower using an intentionally slow velocity
(173). Substantially, less peak force, power, and number of
repetitions performed were observed with "super slow"
repetition velocity (10:10) compared with a self-selected fast
velocity when matched for intensity (111). A 30% reduction
in training load is necessary when using a "very slow"
velocity (10:5) compared with a slow velocity (2:4) (141).
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
692
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

Another study comparing "very slow" (10:5) to traditional
velocity (1:1) showed that 37-40% reductions in training
loads were needed to attain the same number of repetitions
(129). These data suggest that motor unit activity may be
limited when intentionally slow velocities at lighter loads are
incorporated and ultimately may not provide an optimal
stimulus for strength enhancement in resistance-trained
individuals.
Compared with slow velocities, moderate (1-2:1-2) and
fast (<1:1) velocities have been shown to be more effective for
enhanced muscular performance capacities (e.g., number of
repetitions performed, work and power output, and volume)
(161,189) and for increasing the rate of strength gains (113).
The number of repetitions performed is based upon a
continuum depending on the lifting velocity where the
largest numbers of repetitions are performed with a fast
velocity and decreases proportionately as velocity becomes
slower (234). The effect of lifting velocity on repetition
performance appears largest with light to moderately heavy
loading (234). Most advanced RT studies examining fast
velocities with moderately high intensities have shown these
velocities to be more effective than traditionally slower
velocities for strength increases (133,190). It appears that the
intent to maximally accelerate the weight during training is
critical in maximizing strength gains (19). Although loading
may be moderate to heavy, the intent to lift the weight as fast
as possible has been shown to be critical for maximizing
strength increases (19). Keeler et al. (141) showed that
traditional velocity (2:4) RT produced significantly greater
strength increases over 10 wk than “super slow” training in
five of eight exercises trained (overall increase of 39% vs
15% in traditional and "super slow," respectively). Over 6
wk of RT in untrained individuals, it was shown that training
at a faster velocity (1:1) led to ~11% greater strength
increases than training at a slower velocity (3:3) (192).
However, a study by Neils et al. (195) showed statistically
similar increases in strength between "super slow" and slow-
velocity (2:4) training.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For untrained individuals, it is recommended that
slow and moderate velocities be used (113,141,161,189,192,195).
Evidence category B. For intermediate training, it is
recommended that moderate velocity be used for RT
(113,141,161,189,192,195).
Evidence category C. For advanced training, the inclusion
of a continuum of velocities from unintentionally slow to fast
velocities is recommended. The velocity selected should
correspond to the intensity and the intent should be to
maximize the velocity of the CON muscle action (19,133).
Frequency
Optimal RT frequency (the number of workouts
per week)
depends upon several factors such as volume, intensity,
exercise selection, level of conditioning, recovery ability,
and number of muscle groups trained per workout session.
Numerous studies have used frequencies of two to three
alternating days per week in previously untrained individuals
(34,44,56,116). This frequency has been shown to be an
effective initial frequency, whereas 1-2 dwk‍
1
-1
appears to be
an effective maintenance frequency for those individuals
already engaged in RT (93). In several studies comparing
strength gains, 1) 3 d of training per week was superior to 1
(183) and 2 d (94), 2) 3 d produced similar strength increases
to 2 dwk when volume was equated (34), 3) 4 d'wk‍
was superior to three (127), 4) 2 dwk was superior to 1
(217), and 5) 3-5 d'wk 1 was superior to 1 and 2 d (85).
Meta-analytical data have shown that strength gains in
untrained individuals were highest with a frequency of 3
d'wk (225).
1
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that novice individuals train the
entire body 2-3 d⋅wk‍ (34,44,56,94,116,183,225).
1
It appears that progression from untrained to intermediate
training does not necessitate a change in frequency for
training each muscle group but may be more dependent upon
alterations in other acute variables such as exercise selection,
volume, and intensity. Increasing frequency enables greater
specialization (e.g., greater exercise selection and volume per
muscle group in accordance with more specific goals).
Upper/lower body split or muscle group split routines are
common at this level in addition to total-body workouts
(157). Similar increases in strength have been observed
between upper/lower- and total-body workouts (32).
Evidence category B. It is recommended that for
progression to intermediate training, a frequency of 3-4
d-wk be used (3 d if using a total-body workout, 4 d if
using a split routine thereby training each major muscle
group twice) (34,85,94,183,225).
1
-1
Optimal progression of frequency during advanced training
varies considerably. It has been shown that football players
training 4-5 dwk achieved better results than those who
trained either 3 or 6 dwk (118). Advanced and elite
weightlifters and bodybuilders use high-frequency training,
for example, four to six sessions per week or more. Double-
split routines (two training sessions per day with emphasis on
different muscle groups) are common during training (102),
which may result in 8-12 training sessions per week.
Frequencies as high as 18 sessions per week have been
reported in elite Olympic weightlifters (280). The rationale
for high-frequency training is that frequent short sessions
followed by periods of recovery, nutrition supplementation,
and food intake allow for high-intensity training and
performance (reduced fatigue). Häkkinen and Kallinen
(103) reported greater increases in muscle cross-sectional
area (CSA) and strength when training volume was divided
into two sessions per day as opposed to one. Elite power
lifters train 4-6 dwk¹ (75). It is important to note that not
all muscle groups are trained per workout during a high-
frequency model of training. Meta-analytical data have
shown that training a muscle group two times per week in
advanced individuals yielded the highest effect size (225)
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise Ⓡ 693
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

and two to three times per week yielded similar effect sizes
in athletes (206).
Evidence category C. It is recommended that advanced
lifters train 4-6 dwk¹. Elite weightlifters and body-
builders may benefit from using very high frequency, for
example, two workouts in 1 d for 4-5 dwk
(102,118,206,225).
Muscular Hypertrophy
1
It is well known that RT induces muscular hypertrophy
(156,176,249,250) through mechanical, metabolic, and hor-
monal processes. The process of hypertrophy involves a
proportionate increase in the net accretion of the contractile
proteins actin and myosin as well as other structural proteins.
Mechanical loading leads to a series of intracellular events
that ultimately regulates gene expression and protein
synthesis. RT may alter the activity of nearly 70 genes
(232), up-regulate factors involved with myogenesis (e.g.,
myogenin, MyoD), and down-regulate inhibitory growth
factors (e.g., myostatin) (148,233). Protein synthesis in
human skeletal muscle increases after only one bout of
vigorous RT (210) and peaks approximately 24 h postexer-
cise. This anabolic environment remains elevated from 2 to 3
h postexercise up through 36-48 h postexercise (83,166).
Other factors such as fiber type (176), muscle action (84),
metabolite formation (242), amino acid intake (80), and
endocrine responses (testosterone, growth hormone [GH],
cortisol, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor I) contribute
to the magnitude of hypertrophy (158). Optimal hypertrophy
may comprise maximizing the combination of mechanical
(use of heavy weights, ECC actions, and low to moderate
volume) and metabolic (accumulation of metabolic waste
products) stimuli.
The time course of hypertrophy has been examined in
previously untrained individuals. Neural adaptations pre-
dominate during the early stages of training (188). Muscle
hypertrophy becomes evident within the first 6 wk (211),
although changes in the quality of proteins (250) and
protein synthesis rates (211) take place much earlier. From
this point onward, there appears to be interplay between
neural adaptations and hypertrophy in the expression of
strength. Less muscle mass is recruited during training with
a given workload once adaptation has taken place (215).
These findings indicate that progressive overloading is
necessary for maximal muscle fiber recruitment and,
consequently, muscle fiber hypertrophy. This also indicates
that alterations in program design targeting both neural and
hypertrophic factors may be most beneficial for maximizing
strength and hypertrophy.
PROGRAM DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR INCREASING MUSCLE HYPERTROPHY
Muscle Action
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. Similar to strength training (55,112,131), it is
recommended that CON, ECC, and ISOM muscle actions be
included for novice, intermediate, and advanced RT.
Loading and Volume
A variety of styles of training have been shown to
increase hypertrophy in men and women (3,49,157,249). In
untrained individuals, similar increases in lean body mass
have been shown between single- and multiple-set training
(175,228), although there is evidence supporting greater
hypertrophy enhancement with multiple-set training (231).
Many of these studies in previously untrained individuals
have demonstrated that general, nonspecific program design
is effective for increasing hypertrophy in novice to
intermediate individuals. Manipulation of acute program
variables to optimize both the mechanical and the metabolic
factors (using several loading/volume schemes) appears to
be the most effective way to optimize hypertrophy during
advanced stages of training. RT programs targeting muscle
hypertrophy have used moderate to very high loading,
relatively high volume, and short rest intervals (75,157).
These programs have been shown to induce a greater acute
elevation in testosterone and GH than high-load, low-volume
programs with long (3 min) rest periods (91,151,152). Total
work, in combination with mechanical loading, has been
implicated for both gains in strength and hypertrophy (190).
This finding has been supported, in part, by greater
hypertrophy associated with high-volume, multiple-set pro-
grams compared with low-volume, single-set programs in
resistance-trained individuals (149,155,169). Traditional RT
(high load, low repetition, and long rest periods) has
produced significant hypertrophy (96,258); however, it has
been suggested that the total work involved with traditional
RT alone may not maximize hypertrophy. Goto et al. (91)
showed that the addition of one set per exercise (to a
conventional RT workout) consisting of light loading for 25-
35 repetitions led to increased muscle CSA whereas
conventional strength training alone (e.g., multiple sets of
3-5 RM) did not increase muscle CSA. The addition of the
high-volume sets led to greater acute elevations in GH (91).
However, light loading alone may not be sufficient as
Campos et al. (33) have reported that 8 wk of training with
two sets of 25-28 RM did not result in Type I or Type II
muscle fiber hypertrophy. Thus, it appears that the combi-
nation of strength training (emphasizing mechanical loading)
and hypertrophy training, that is, moderate loading, high
repetitions, short rest intervals, which emphasizes total work
(and reliance upon glycolysis and metabolic factors), is most
effective for advanced hypertrophy training.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For novice and intermediate individuals, it is
recommended that moderate loading be used (70-85% of 1
RM) for 8-12 repetitions per set for one to three sets per
exercise (3,49,157,175,228,249).
Evidence category C. For advanced training, it is
recommended that a loading range of 70-100% of 1 RM
be used for 1-12 repetitions per set for three to six sets per
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
694
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

exercise in periodized manner such that the majority of
training is devoted to 6-12 RM and less training devoted to
1-6 RM loading (149,155,169).
Exercise Selection and Order
Both single- and multiple-joint exercises increase hyper-
trophy, and the complexity of the exercises chosen has been
shown to affect the time course of hypertrophy such that
multiple-joint exercises require a longer neural adaptive
phase than single-joint exercises (37). Less is understood
concerning the effect of exercise order on muscle hypertro-
phy. Although exceptions exist (e.g., using an opposite
sequencing strategy to induce higher levels of fatigue), it
appears that the recommended exercise sequencing guide-
lines for strength training apply for increasing muscle
hypertrophy.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that single- and multiple-joint
free-weight and machine exercises be included in an RT
program in novice, intermediate, and advanced individuals
(30,157,169,172,178,248–250,274).
Evidence category C. For exercise sequencing, an order
similar to strength training is recommended (244,245,256).
Rest Periods
The amount of rest between sets and exercises
significantly affects the metabolic (221) and the hor-
monal (158) responses to an acute bout of resistance
exercise. Rest period length significantly affects muscu-
lar strength, but less is known concerning hypertrophy.
One study reported no significant difference between 30-,
90-, and 180-s rest intervals in muscle girth, skinfolds, or
body mass in recreationally trained men over 5 wk (230).
Ahtiainen et al. (3) showed that 3 months of training with
5-min rest intervals produced similar increase in muscle
CSA to training with 2-min rest intervals. Short rest
periods (1-2 min) coupled with moderate to high
intensity and volume have elicited the greatest acute
anabolic hormonal response in comparison to programs
utilizing very heavy loads with long rest periods
(151,152). The acute hormonal responses have been
regarded potentially more important for hypertrophy than
chronic changes (177). It appears a range of rest intervals
may be used effectively to target hypertrophy depending
on training intensity. In that regard, training for muscular
hypertrophy alone may differ from training for strength
or power per se because the explicit objective is to
produce an anabolic environment.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category C. It is recommended that 1- to 2-min rest periods be
used in novice and intermediate training programs. For
advanced training, rest period length should correspond to
the goals of each exercise or training phase such that 2- to 3-
min rest periods may be used with heavy loading for core
exercises and 1-2 min may be used for other exercises of
moderate to moderately high intensity (3,151,152).
Repetition Velocity
Less is known concerning the effect of repetition velocity
on hypertrophy. In untrained individuals, fast (1:1) and
moderate to slow (3:3) velocities of training produced
similar changes in elbow flexor girth after 6 wk of training
(192). However, 8 wk of fast (210° s¹) ECC isokinetic
training produced larger increases in Type II muscle fiber
CSA than slow (20°·s¯¹) training (241), and 8 wk of fast
ECC (180° s¹) isokinetic training produced greater hyper-
trophy than slow ECC (30°-s¹), fast and slow CON
training (64). For dynamic constant external RT, it has
been suggested that higher velocities of movement pose less
of a stimulus for hypertrophy than slow and moderate
velocities. However, intentional slow velocities require
significant reductions in loading and result in less of a
blood lactate response and less metabolic response when
total training time is equated (129). It does appear that the
use of different velocities is warranted for long-term
improvements in hypertrophy for advanced training.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category C. It is recommended that slow to moderate
velocities be used by novice- and intermediate-trained
individuals. For advanced training, it is recommended that
slow, moderate, and fast repetition velocities be used
depending on the load, the repetition number, and the goals
of the particular exercise (64,192).
Frequency
-1
The frequency of training depends upon the number of
muscle groups trained per workout as well as the volume and
intensity. Frequencies of 2-3 d-wk have been effective in
novice and intermediate men and women (34,49,116).
Higher frequency of RT has been suggested for advanced
hypertrophy training. However, only certain muscle groups
are trained per workout with a high frequency.
-1
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that a frequency of 2-3 dwk
be used for novice training (when training the total body each
workout) (34,49,116).
Evidence category B. For intermediate training, the
recommendation is similar for total-body workouts or 4
when using an upper/lower body split routine (each
major muscle group trained twice per week).
d-wk
-1
Evidence category C. For advanced training, a frequency
of 4-6 d-wk-1
is recommended. Muscle group split routines
(one to three muscle groups trained per workout) are
common enabling higher volume per muscle group.
PROGRAM DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
INCREASING MUSCULAR POWER
Maximal power production is required in the movements of
sport, work, and daily living. By definition, more power is
produced when the same amount of work is completed in a
shorter period or when a greater amount of work is performed
during the same period. Muscular power is the scalar product
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise Ⓡ 695
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

of force generation and movement velocity, is demonstrated as
the highest power output attainable during a given movement/
repetition, and has been viewed as an exceedingly important
testing variable and training objective.
Neuromuscular contributions to maximal muscle power
include 1) maximal rate of force development (RFD), 2) force
production at slow and fast contraction velocities, 3) stretch-
shortening cycle performance, and 4) coordination of move-
ment pattern and skill. Several studies have shown improved
power performance following traditional RT (1,88,156,277),
demonstrating the reliance of power production on muscular
force development. However, programs consisting of move-
ments with high power output using relatively light loads
have been shown to be superior for improving vertical jump
ability than traditional strength training (98,99). Considering
that power is the product of force and velocity, it appears that
heavy RT with slow velocities improves maximal force
production whereas power training (utilizing light to moder-
ate loads at high velocities) increases force output at higher
velocities and RFD (98,99).
Heavy RT could decrease power output over time unless
accompanied by explosive movements (25). The inherent
problem with traditional weight training is that the load is
decelerated for a considerable proportion (24-40%) of the
CON movement (60,197). This percentage increases to 52%
when performing the lift with a lower percentage (81%) of
1 RM lifted (60) or when attempting to move the bar
rapidly in an effort to train more specifically near the
movement speed of the target activity (197). Ballistic
resistance exercise (explosive movements which enable
acceleration throughout the full range of motion resulting in
greater peak and average lifting velocities) has been shown
to limit this problem (48,121,198,276). Loaded jump squats
with 30% of 1 RM have been shown to increase vertical
jump performance more than traditional back squats and
plyometrics (276).
Exercise Selection and Order
Although single-joint exercises have been studied,
multiple-joint exercises have been used extensively for
power training (139). The inclusion of total-body exercises
(e.g., power clean and push press) is recommended as these
exercises have been shown to require rapid force production
(82) and be very effective for enhancing power (263). It is
recommended that these exercises be performed early in a
workout and sequenced based on complexity (e.g., snatch
before power cleans and variations such as high pulls).
Additionally, performing high-velocity power exercises
before a multiple-joint exercise such as the squat has been
shown to improve squat performance (247), for example,
via postactivation potentiation.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category B. The use of predominately multiple-joint exercises
performed with sequencing guidelines similar to strength
training is recommended for novice, intermediate, and
advanced power training (82,139,247,263).
Loading/Volume/Repetition Velocity
The intensity of which peak power is attained has been
variable and shown to be dependent on the type of exercise,
whether it is ballistic or traditional, and the strength level of
the individual (139). Peak power during ballistic exercises
has been shown to range between 15% and 50% (upper
body exercises), from 0% (body weight) to 60% (lower
body exercises, primarily the jump squat), and peak power
for traditional exercises ranges between 30% and 70% of 1
RM (41-43,139,260). Peak power for the Olympic lifts
typically occurs approximately 70-80% of 1 RM (42,140).
Although any intensity can enhance muscle power and shift
the force-velocity curve to the right, specificity is needed
such that training encompasses a range of intensities but
emphasis placed upon the intensities that match the
demands of the sport or activities performed (139). Fast
lifting velocities are needed to optimize power development
with submaximal loading, and the intent to maximally lift
the weight fast is critical when a higher intensity is
used (19).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that concurrent to a typical
strength training program, a power component is incorporated
consisting of one to three sets per exercise using light to
moderate loading (30-60% of 1 RM for upper body exercises,
0-60% of 1 RM for lower body exercises) for three to six
repetitions (19,41-43,139,260).
Evidence category B. Progression for power enhance-
ment uses various loading strategies in a periodized manner.
Heavy loading (85-100% of 1 RM) is necessary for
increasing the force component of the power equation,
and light to moderate loading (30-60% of 1 RM for upper
body exercises, 0-60% of 1 RM for lower body exercises)
performed at an explosive velocity is necessary for
increasing fast force production. A multiple-set (three to
six sets) power program be integrated into a strength
training program consisting of one to six repetitions in
periodized manner is recommended (74,199,206).
Rest Periods
Rest period length for power training is similar to
strength training. Taking the needed rest is vital to ensure
the quality of each repetition being performed in a set
(achieving a high percent of peak velocity and achieving a
high percentage of maximal power output). In addition to
the technical quality of each repetition performed in a
power training program, accentuated rest periods are
also needed for preservation of the appropriate training
intensity to occur, which will elicit the desired neurological
response.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category D. Rest periods of at least 2-3 min between
sets for core exercises are recommended. A shorter
rest interval (1-2 min) is recommended for assistance
exercises.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
696
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

Frequency
Power training is typically integrated into a periodized
strength training program due to the important inherent
relationships between the two variables (97,198,199).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. The recommended frequency for novice power
training is similar to strength training (2-3 dwk stressing
the total body).
Evidence category B. For intermediate power training, it
is recommended that either a total-body or an upper/lower-
body split workout be used for a frequency of 3-4 d·wk¯‍
Evidence category C. For advanced power training, a
frequency of 4-5 d'wk¯¹ is recommended using predomi-
nantly total-body or upper/lower body split workouts.
PROGRAM DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
INCREASING MUSCULAR ENDURANCE
Local muscular endurance, submaximal local muscular
and high-intensity (or strength) endurance, has been shown
to improve during RT (9,59,125,169,255). RT has been
shown to increase absolute LME (i.e., the maximal number
of repetitions performed with a specific pretraining load)
(9,33,125,149), but limited effects are observed in relative
LME (i.e., endurance assessed at a specific relative intensity
or %1 RM) (172). Moderate to low RT with high repetitions
has been shown to be most effective for improving absolute
LME in most studies (9,33,91,125,227), although one study
found high-intensity, low-repetition training to be more ef-
fective in highly trained endurance athletes (59). A rela-
tionship exists between increases in strength and LME such
that strength training alone may improve endurance to a
certain extent. However, specificity of training produces the
greatest improvements (9,255). Training to increase LME
implies that the individual 1) performs high repetitions
(long-duration sets with high muscle time under tension)
and/or 2) minimizes recovery between sets.
Exercise Selection and Order
Exercises stressing multiple or large muscle groups have
elicited the greatest acute metabolic responses during
resistance exercise (17). Metabolic demand is an important
stimulus for adaptations within skeletal muscle necessary to
improve LME (increased mitochondrial and capillary
number, fiber type transitions, and buffering capacity).
The sequencing of exercises may not be as important in
comparison to strength training as fatigue (i.e., substrate
depletion and accumulation of metabolic waste products) is
a necessary component of endurance training.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. It is recommended that unilateral and bilateral
multiple- and single-joint exercises be included in a program
targeting improved LME using various sequencing com-
binations for novice, intermediate, and advanced LME training
(9,59,125,169,255).
Loading and Volume
Loading is multidimensional. Light loads coupled with
higher repetitions (15-25 repetitions or more) have been
shown to be most effective for increasing LME (9,33,
227,255). However, moderate to heavy loading (coupled
with short rest periods) is also effective for increasing high-
intensity and absolute LME (9,33). High-volume (including
multiple sets) programs have been shown to be superior for
LME enhancement (33,149,169,255).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For novice and intermediate training, it is
recommended that relatively light loads be used (10-15
repetitions) (9,33,227,255).
Evidence category C. For advanced training, it is
recommended that various loading strategies be used for
multiple sets per exercise (10-25 repetitions or more) in
periodized manner leading to higher overall volume using
lighter intensities (227).
Rest Periods
The duration of rest intervals during resistance exercise
appears to affect LME. It has been shown that bodybuilders
(who typically train with high-volume and short rest
periods) demonstrate a significantly lower fatigue rate in
comparison to power lifters (who typically train with low to
moderate volume and longer rest periods) (150). These data
demonstrate the benefits of high-volume, short rest period
workouts for improving LME. It is important to note that
another popular method of endurance training is circuit RT.
Circuit RT has been shown to increase LME (167,275) and
is effective due to its high continuity. Thus, minimal rest is
taken between exercises.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category C. It is recommended that short rest periods be used
for LME training, for example, 1-2 min for high-repetition
sets (15-20 repetitions or more), <1 min for moderate (10-15
repetitions) sets. For circuit weight training, it is recommended
that rest periods correspond to the time needed to get from one
exercise station to another (167,275).
Frequency
The frequency for LME training appears similar to
hypertrophy training.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. Low frequency (2-3 d-wk ¹) is effective in
novice individuals when training the entire body
(9,59,125,169,255).
Evidence category B. For intermediate training, 3 dwk‍
-1
is recommended for total-body workouts and 4 dwk‍ is
recommended for upper/lower body split routine workouts.
Evidence category C. For advanced training, a higher
frequency may be used (4-6 d'wk¯¹) if muscle group split
routines are used.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise ® 697
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

Repetition Velocity
Studies examining isokinetic exercise have shown that a
fast training velocity, that is, 180° s was more effective
1
"
1
"
than a slow training velocity, that is, 30°.s for improving
LME (2,186). Thus, fast contraction velocities are recom-
mended for isokinetic training. However, it appears that both
fast and slow velocities are effective for improving LME
during dynamic constant external RT. Two effective strate-
gies used to prolong set duration are 1) moderate repetition
number using an intentionally slow velocity and 2) high rep-
etition number using moderate to fast velocities. Ballor et al.
(17) has shown that intentionally slow-velocity training with
light loads (5:5 and slower) was more metabolically
demanding than moderate and fast velocities. However,
Mazzetti et al. (173) showed that explosive CON repetition
velocity resulted in greater rates of energy expenditure than a
slower velocity (2:2). When matched for intensity and volume,
slower velocity may result in greater blood lactates (173).
Increasing the time under tension with sufficient loading
can increase muscular fatigue (262), and fatigue is
important to eliciting LME enhancement. This result was
shown by Tran et al. (262) who compared three sets of 10
repetitions (5:5), 10 repetitions (2:2), or 5 repetitions (10:4)
and reported that the highest volume load and time under
tension, for example, protocol 1, resulted in the largest
magnitude of peripheral fatigue. Peak ISOM force (19%)
and rate of force development (RFD) (46%) were reduced
significantly more than with the other protocols (13-15%
and 9-13%, respectively). Thus, traditional velocities may
result in less fatigue than slower velocities provided loading
is sufficient. However, it is difficult to perform a large
number of repetitions using intentionally slow velocities.
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category B. It is recommended that intentionally slow velocities
be used when a moderate number of repetitions (10-15) are
used. Moderate to fast velocities are more effective for
increasing repetition number than slow-velocity training
(161). If performing a large number of repetitions (15-25 or
more), then moderate to faster velocities are recommended.
RELEVANCE TO SPORTS APPLICATIONS
Motor Performance
Improved motor performance results from RT. The prin-
ciple of "specificity" is important for improving motor per-
formance as the greatest improvements are observed when
RT programs are prescribed that are specific to the task or the
activity. The recommendations for improving motor perfor-
mance are similar to that of strength and power training.
Vertical Jump
Force production during isokinetic and dynamic resistance
exercise measures correlates to vertical jump height
(28,208,216), and RT may improve vertical jump (1,252).
High correlations between closed-chain exercises (exercises
where the distal segments are fixed, i.e., squat) and vertical (r
= 0.72) and standing long jump (r = 0.65) performance have
been reported (24), and training with closed-chain exercises
is more effective for improving vertical jump than open-
chain exercises (12). Total-body multiple-joint exercises such
as the Olympic lifts (snatch, clean and jerk, and variations)
have been shown to improve jumping ability (82,120,263) to
a greater extent than strength training (120). The high
velocity and joint involvement of these exercises and their
ability to integrate strength, power, and neuromuscular
coordination demonstrates a direct carryover to improving
jump performance. The effect of intensity on vertical jump
improvements appears related to contraction velocity. Sev-
eral studies (98,99,276) have shown improvements in jump
height using light loads (<60% of 1 RM). Other reports show
vertical jump enhancement can be achieved while using
higher intensities (>80% of 1 RM) (1). Multiple-set RT has
been shown to be superior for improving vertical jump
performance in comparison to single-set RT programs (149),
and 5-6 d'wk of training elicited greater vertical jump
improvements than 3-4 d'wk¹ in football players (118).
1
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category B. It is recommended that multiple-joint exercises
be performed using a combination of heavy and light to
moderate loading (using fast repetition velocity), with moder-
ate to high volume in periodized fashion 4-6 dwk for
maximal progression in vertical jumping ability
(1,82,98,99,120,149,263). The inclusion of plyometric training
(explosive form of exercise involving various jumps) in
combination with RT is recommended.
Sprint Speed
=
Force production is related to sprint performance (4,11)
and is a good indicator of speed when testing is performed
at isokinetic velocities greater than 180°·s (205). Relative
(to body mass) strength correlates highly with sprint
velocity and acceleration (r 0.88) (208) as well as jump
squat height and power (46). However, increasing maximal
strength does not appear to be highly related to reducing
sprint time (15). Traditional strength and ballistic training
has only produced small reductions in sprint times
(118,120,174). However, specific hip flexor strength train-
ing was shown to reduce sprint time (50). The combination
of strength and sprint training results in the greatest
improvements in sprinting speed (52).
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category B. It is recommended that the combination of
resistance and ballistic resistance exercise (along with sprint
and plyometric training) be included for progression in
sprinting ability (51,118,120,174).
Agility
Muscular strength is an important factor in an individual's
ability to stop and change direction rapidly (11,119,208).
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
698
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

-1
Lower-body multiple-joint exercise strength and power
have been shown to correlate to various agility tests (168).
A significant relationship has been reported between peak
ECC hamstring force at 90°.s and agility run time and
may be an important indicator of success (11). No change
(48,119,120), a reduction (45), or an increase in time (78) in
agility (t-test) has been observed following RT. It appears
that agility-specific training is most beneficial for enhancing
agility performance.
Sport-Specific Activities
The importance of RT for other sport-specific activities
has been shown. Strength in the kicking limb for soccer
players highly correlates to ball velocity (218). Significant
correlations have been shown between wrist and elbow
extensor and flexors, shoulder abduction/adduction, and
shoulder internal rotation strength and throwing speed
(73,204). Several studies have shown increases (2.0-4.1%)
in throwing velocities in both baseball (162,180,196) and
European handball (117) players following traditional
(162,196) and ballistic (180) RT. Improvements in shot
put performance (38), golf (261), distance running (134),
swimming performance (86), and tennis service velocity
(155) have been reported following RT.
PROGRESSION MODELS FOR RESISTANCE
EXERCISE IN HEALTHY, OLDER ADULTS
Progression and maintenance (maintenance of physical
function in this population may be viewed as progression)
in healthy, older adults is brought about by systematic
manipulation of the acute program variables. However,
caution must be taken with the elderly population as to the
rate of progression, particularly those with hypertension,
arthritis, cardiovascular disease, or any other debilitating
condition that limits physical function. There are other
modes of resistance exercise, such as aquatic resistance
exercise, that have been shown to be especially beneficial in
the older population and to reduce some of the risks of
resistance exercise. These studies have shown increased
muscular strength, power, and bone mineral density as well
as improvements in cardiovascular and psychological
function (13,257,264,266,267). Further, each individual
will respond differently based on their current training
status and past experience, joint health, and individual
response to the training stress. A quality training program
should improve the quality of life by enhancing several
components of muscular fitness, that is, strength, balance,
etc. (61). Programs that include variation, gradual progres-
sive overload, careful attention to recovery and stress, and
specificity are warranted. This finding was recently shown
in elderly women where peak torque and average power
plateaued as a result of a significant increase in volume (at
the same intensity) (243).
Muscular strength and hypertrophy training may im-
prove the quality of life and limit sarcopenia. Optimizing
strength to meet/exceed performance goals is important to
a growing number of older adults. Numerous studies have
shown increased muscle strength and size in older adults
following RT as long as basic requirements of intensity
and volume are met (31,36,61,69,77,105,106). The basic
RT program recommended by the ACSM for the healthy
adult (6,7) has been an effective starting point in the el-
derly population.
−1
When the older adult's long-term goal is progression
toward higher levels of strength and hypertrophy, evidence
supports the use of variation in program design (105,
106,154). Studies have shown significant improvements in
strength in this population (61,69,77). It is important that
progression be introduced gradually. A training frequency of
1-3 d.wk produced similar increases in strength; however,
3 dwk
was superior to 1-2 d for improving LME, co-
ordination, balance, and cardiorespiratory fitness in older
women (193). Some studies have shown similar strength
increases between moderate (50-60% of 1 RM) and high
(80-85% of 1 RM) training intensities or 6-15 RM (109,
265) over 18-24 wk of training. Training 3 d-wk¯‍
50%, 65%, and 80% of 1 RM each day produced similar
strength increases to training 3 d-wk¹ with 80% of 1 RM
(128). However, several studies have shown greater strength
increases with high-intensity (80-83% of 1 RM) versus
moderate-intensity (50-63% of 1 RM) and low-intensity
(20-48% of 1 RM) training (53,65,66,135,136). Thus, a va-
riety of intensities may be effective in this population es-
pecially early in training.
with
Evidence statement and recommendation. Evidence
category A. For improvements in strength and hypertrophy in
older adults, the use of free-weight and machine multiple- and
single-joint exercises with slow to moderate lifting velocity for
one to three sets per exercise with 60-80% of 1 RM for 8-12
repetitions with 1-3 min of rest in between sets for 2-3
d-wk is recommended (31,53,61,65,66,69,77,105,106,
109,128,135,136,265).
The ability to develop high muscular power diminishes
with age (107). An increase in strength and power enables
the older adult to improve performance in tasks that re-
quire a rapid RFD, including a reduced risk of falls (212).
There is support for the inclusion of power training for
the healthy older adult (107,154). Muscle atrophy results
from fiber denervation with loss of some fibers and at-
rophy of others, that is, especially fast twitch, with aging
and inactivity (164). Age-related muscle atrophy is as-
sociated with reductions in strength and power (77,104),
and reductions in power exceed decreases in maximal
strength (246). Although most studies in the elderly
examined heavy RT programs, power training may
optimize functional abilities as well as have secondary
effects on other physiological systems, for example, con-
nective tissue (18).
Since 2001, several studies have examined power
training, for example, free-weight and machine exercises
with the CON phase performed rapidly with a controlled
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise Ⓡ 699
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
TABLE 2. Summary of progressive resistance training recommendations.
Evidence Statement
Strength training
CON, ECC, and ISOM actions be included for novice, intermediate, and advanced training.
Training with loads ~60-70% of 1 RM for 8-12 repetitions for novice to intermediate individuals and cycling loads of 80-100% of 1 RM for advanced individuals.
When training at a specific RM load, it is recommended that a 2-10% increase in load be applied when the individual can perform the current workload for
1-2 repetitions over the desired number on two consecutive training sessions.
It is recommended that 1-3 sets per exercise be used by novice individuals.
Multiple-set programs (with systematic variation of volume and intensity) are recommended for progression to intermediate and advanced training.
Unilateral and bilateral single- and multiple-joint exercises should be included with emphasis on multiple-joint exercises for maximizing strength in novice, intermediate,
and advanced individuals.
Free-weight and machine exercises should be included for novice to intermediate training.
For advanced strength training, it is recommended that emphasis be placed on free-weight exercises with machine exercises used to compliment program needs.
Recommendations for sequencing exercises for novice, intermediate, and advanced strength training include large muscle group exercises before small muscle
group exercises, multiple-joint exercises before single-joint exercises, higher-intensity exercises before lower-intensity exercises, or rotation of upper and lower body
or opposing exercises.
It is recommended that rest periods of at least 2-3 min be used for core exercises using heavier loads for novice, intermediate, and advanced training. For assistance
exercises, a shorter rest period length of 1-2 min may suffice.
For untrained individuals, it is recommended that slow and moderate CON velocities be used.
For intermediate training, it is recommended that moderate CON velocity be used.
For advanced training, the inclusion of a continuum of velocities from unintentionally slow to fast CON velocities is recommended and should correspond to the intensity.
It is recommended that novice individuals train the entire body 2-3 d.wk 1.
It is recommended that for progression to intermediate training, a frequency of 3-4 d-wk 1 be used (based on how many muscle groups are trained per workout).
It is recommended that advanced lifters train 4-6 d-wk-1.
Muscle hypertrophy
It is recommended that CON, ECC, and ISOM muscle actions be included.
For novice and intermediate training, it is recommended that moderate loading be used (70-85% of 1 RM) for 8-12 repetitions per set for 1-3 sets per exercise.
For advanced training, it is recommended that a loading range of 70-100% of 1 RM be used for 1-12 repetitions per set for 3-6 sets per exercise in a periodized
manner such that the majority of training is devoted to 6-12 RM and less training devoted to 1-6 RM loading.
It is recommended that single- and multiple-joint free-weight and machine exercises be included in novice, intermediate, and advanced individuals.
For exercise sequencing, an order similar to strength training is recommended.
It is recommended that 1- to 2-min rest periods be used in novice and intermediate training; for advanced training, length of rest period should correspond to the
goals of each exercise such that 2- to 3-min rest periods may be used with heavy loading for core exercises and 1-2 min may be used for other exercises of
moderate to moderately high intensity.
It is recommended that slow to moderate velocities be used by novice- and intermediate-trained individuals; for advanced training, it is recommended that slow,
moderate, and fast repetition velocities be used depending on the load, repetition number, and goals of the particular exercise.
It is recommended that a frequency of 2-3 d-wk¹ be used for novice training.
For intermediate training, the recommendation is similar for total-body workouts or 4 d-wk1 when using an upper/lower body split routine.
For advanced training, a frequency of 4-6 d-wk1 is recommended.
Muscle power
The use of predominately multiple-joint exercises performed with sequencing guidelines similar to strength training is recommended for novice, intermediate, and
advanced power training.
It is recommended that concurrent to a typical strength training program, a power component is incorporated consisting of 1-3 sets per exercise using light to
moderate loading (30-60% of 1 RM for upper body exercises, 0-60% of 1 RM for lower body exercises) for 3-6 repetitions not to failure.
Various loading strategies are recommended for advanced training. Heavy loading (85-100% of 1 RM) is necessary for increasing force and light to moderate loading
(30-60% of 1 RM for upper body exercises, 0-60% of 1 RM for lower body exercises) performed at an explosive velocity is necessary for increasing fast force production.
A multiple-set (3-6 sets) power program be integrated into a strength training program consisting of 1-6 repetitions in a periodized manner is recommended.
Rest periods of at least 2-3 min between sets for core exercises are recommended when intensity is high. For assistance exercises and those of less intensity,
a shorter rest interval (1-2 min) is recommended.
The recommended frequency for novice power training is similar to strength training (2-3 d-wk 1).
For intermediate power training, it is recommended that either a total-body or upper/lower-body split workout be used for a frequency of 3-4 d-wk
For advanced power training, a frequency of 4-5 d-wk1 is recommended using predominantly total-body or upper/lower-body split workouts.
Local muscular endurance
It is recommended that unilateral and bilateral multiple- and single-joint exercises be included using various sequencing combinations for novice, intermediate, and
advanced local muscular endurance training.
For novice and intermediate training, it is recommended that relatively light loads be used (10-15 repetitions) with moderate to high volume.
Grade
AAB
AAA
A
300
А
А
BCAACABC
А
AAA
ACC
0
ABC
B
A
BA
DACC
AC
A
А
For advanced training, it is recommended that various loading strategies be used for multiple sets per exercise (10-25 repetitions or more) in a periodized manner
leading to a higher overall volume using lighter intensities.
с
It is recommended that short rest periods be used for muscular endurance training, e.g., 1-2 min for high-repetition sets (15-20 repetitions or more), less than 1 minute for
moderate (10-15 repetitions) sets. For circuit weight training, it is recommended that rest periods correspond to the time needed to get from one exercise station to another.
Low frequency (2-3 d-wk 1) is effective in novice individuals when training the entire body.
с
А
For intermediate training, 3 d-wk 1 is recommended for total-body workouts and 4 d-wk 1 is recommended for upper/lower body split routine workouts.
For advanced training, a higher frequency may be used (4-6 d-wk¹) if muscle group split routines are used.
It is recommended that intentionally slow velocities be used when a moderate number of repetitions (10-15) are used.
If performing a large number of repetitions (15-25 or more), then moderate to faster velocities are recommended.
Motor performance
It is recommended that multiple-joint exercises be performed using a combination of heavy and light to moderate loading (using fast repetition velocity) with
moderate to high volume in periodized fashion 4-6 d-wk for maximal progression in vertical jumping ability. The inclusion of plyometric training (explosive
form of exercise involving various jumps) in combination with resistance training is recommended.
It is recommended that the combination of heavy resistance and ballistic resistance exercise (along with sprint and plyometric training) be included for progression in
sprinting ability.
Older adults
For further improvements in strength and hypertrophy in older adults, the use of both multiple- and single-joint exercises (free weights and machines) with
slow-to-moderate lifting velocity, for 1-3 sets per exercise with 60-80% of 1 RM for 8-12 repetitions with 1-3 min of rest in between sets for 2-3 d-wk is recommended.
Increasing power in healthy older adults include: 1) training to improve muscular strength, and 2) the performance of both single- and multiple-joint exercises for
1-3 sets per exercise using light to moderate loading (30-60% of 1 RM) for 6-10 repetitions with high repetition velocity.
Similar recommendations may apply to older adults as young adults, e.g., low to moderate loads performed for moderate to high repetitions (10-15 or more) for
enhancing muscular endurance.
700
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
В
ACCBB
B
B
A
B
B
http://www.acsm-msse.org
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

(2-3 s) ECC phase, in the elderly. Low-to-moderate
intensity (20-80% of 1 RM), high-velocity training has
been tolerable in this population and consistently shown to
enhance power production, strength, and performance of
activities of daily living, for example, chair rise, and
balance (29,53,57,107,115,124,199,200,243). In compari-
son to traditional RT, power training has been shown to
produce similar (29,70) and inferior increases (185) in
maximal strength, greater improvements in power (29,70),
and greater functional performance enhancement (29,185).
de Vos et al. (53) reported that power training with 50% of
subjects' 1 RM led to the highest gains in muscle power,
whereas RT with loads corresponding to 80% of subjects' 1
RM led to the highest gains in muscular strength and
endurance. On the basis of these data, it appears prudent to
include high-velocity, low-intensity movements in progres-
sion models for older adults.
Evidence category B. Increasing power in healthy older
adults include 1) training to improve muscular strength and 2)
the performance of both single- and multiple-joint exercises for
one tot three sets per exercise using light to moderate loading
(30-60% of 1 RM) for 6-10 repetitions with high repetition
velocity (29,53,57,70,107,115,124,185,199,200,243).
Improvements in LME in the older adult may lead to an
enhanced ability to perform submaximal work and recrea-
tional activities. Although studies examining LME training
in the older adult are limited, LME may be enhanced by
circuit RT (275), strength training (125), and high repeti-
tion, moderate-load programs (9) in younger populations.
Multiple-set training led to 44.3-60.5% increases in LME,
REFERENCES
1. Adams KJ, O'Shea JP, O'Shea KL, Climstein M. The effect of
six weeks of squat, plyometric and squat-plyometric training on
power production. J Appl Sport Sci Res. 1992;6:36-41.
2. Adeyanju K, Crews TR, Meadors WJ. Effects of two speeds of
isokinetic training on muscular strength, power and endurance. J
Sports Med. 1983;23:352–6.
3. Ahtiainen JP, Pakarinen A, Alen M, Kraemer WJ, Häkkinen
K. Short vs. long rest period between the sets in hypertrophic
resistance training: influence on muscle strength, size, and hor-
monal adaptations in trained men. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;
19:572-82.
4. Alexander MJL. The relationship between muscle strength and
sprint kinematics in elite sprinters. Can J Sport Sci. 1989; 14:148–57.
5. Alway SE, Grumbt WH, Gonyea WJ, Stray-Gundersen J. Con-
trasts in muscle and myofibers of elite male and female
bodybuilders. J Appl Physiol. 1989;67:24–31.
6. American College of Sports Medicine. Exercise and physical ac-
tivity for older adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998;30:992-1008.
7. American College of Sports Medicine. Position Stand: the rec-
ommended quantity and quality of exercise for developing and
maintaining cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness, and flexibility
in healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998;30:975-91.
8. American College of Sports Medicine. Progression models in
resistance training for healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2002;34:364-80.
9. Anderson T, Kearney JT. Effects of three resistance training
programs on muscular strength and absolute and relative en-
durance. Res Q. 1982;53:1–7.
whereas single-set training led approxiamtely 10% increases
in individuals 65-78 yr of age (81).
Similar recommendations may apply to older adults as
young adults, for example, low to moderate loads (40-70%
of 1 RM) performed for moderate to high repetitions (10-15
or more) (81).
CONCLUSION
Progression in RT is dependent upon the development of
appropriate and specific training goals and should be an
"individualized" process using appropriate equipment,
program design, and exercise techniques needed for the
safe and effective implementation of a program. Trained
and competent strength and conditioning specialists should
be involved with this process to optimize the safety and
design of a training program. Although examples and
guidelines can be presented, ultimately the good judgment,
experience, and educational training of the exercise profes-
sional involved with this process will dictate the amount of
training success. Nevertheless, many exercise prescription
options are available in the progression of RT to attain goals
related to health, fitness, and physical performance.
This pronouncement was reviewed by the American College of
Sports Medicine Pronouncements Committee and by Ira Jacobs,
PhD, FACSM; Brian Schilling, PhD; Ann Swank, PhD, FACSM;
Anthony Vandervoort, PhD, FACSM; and Joseph Weir, PhD,
FACSM.
This Position Stand replaces the 2002 ACSM Position Stand,
"Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy Adults,"
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2002;34(2):364–80.
10. Anderson K, Behm DG. Trunk muscle activity increases with
unstable squat movements. Can J Appl Physiol. 2005;30:33–45.
11. Anderson MA, Gieck JB, Perrin D, et al. The relationships
among isometric, isotonic, and isokinetic quadriceps and ham-
string force and three components of athletic performance. J
Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1991;14:114–20.
12. Augustsson J, Esko A, Thomee R, Svantesson U. Weight train-
ing of the thigh muscles using closed vs. open kinetic chain
exercises: a comparison of performance enhancement. J Orthop
Sports Phys Ther. 1998;27:3-8.
13. Ay A, Yurtkuran M. Influence of aquatic and weight-bearing
exercises on quantitative ultrasound variables in postmenopausal
women. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2005;84:52–61.
14. Baker D, Wilson G, Carlyon R. Periodization: the effect on
strength of manipulating volume and intensity. J Strength Cond
Res. 1994;8:235-42.
15. Baker D, Nance S. The relation between running speed and
measures of strength and power in professional rugby league
players. J Strength Cond Res. 1999;13:230–5.
16. Baker D, Newton RU. Acute effect on power output of alter-
nating an agonist and antagonist muscle exercise during complex
training. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:202-5.
17. Ballor DL, Becque MD, Katch VL. Metabolic responses dur-
ing hydraulic resistance exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1987;
19:363-7.
18. Bassey EJ, Fiatarone MA, O'Neill ER, et al. Leg extensor power
and functional performance in very old men and women. Clin
Sci. 1992;82:321-7.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise ® 701
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

19. Behm DG, Sale DG. Intended rather than actual movement ve-
locity determines the velocity-specific training response. J Appl
Physiol. 1993;74:359-68.
20. Behm DG, Reardon G, Fitzgerald J, Drinkwater E. The effect of
5, 10, and 20 repetition maximums on the recovery of voluntary
and evoked contractile properties. J Strength Cond Res. 2002;
16:209-18.
21. Behm DG, Anderson KG. The role of instability with resistance
training. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:716-22.
22. Berger RA. Optimum repetitions for the development of
strength. Res Q. 1962;33:334–8.
23. Berger RA. Effect of varied weight training programs on
strength. Res Q. 1962;33:168–81.
24. Blackburn JR, Morrissey MC. The relationship between open
and closed kinetic chain strength of the lower limb and jumping
performance. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1998;27:430-5.
25. Bobbert MA, Van Soest AJ. Effects of muscle strengthening on
vertical jump height: a simulation study. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
1994;26:1012-20.
26. Bonde-Peterson F, Knuttgen HG, Henriksson J. Muscle metab-
olism during exercise with concentric and eccentric contractions.
J Appl Physiol. 1972;33:792-5.
27. Borst SE, Dehoyos DV, Garzarella L, et al. Effects of resistance
training on insulin-like growth factor-1 and IGF binding pro-
teins. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:648-53.
28. Bosco C, Mognoni P, Luhtanen P. Relationship between iso-
kinetic performance and ballistic movement. Eur J Appl Physiol.
1983;51:357-64.
29. Bottaro M, Machado SN, Nogueira W, Scales R, Veloso J.
Effect of high versus low-velocity resistance training on mus-
cular fitness and functional performance in older men. Eur J
Appl Physiol. 2007;99:257–64.
30. Boyer BT. A comparison of the effects of three strength training
programs on women. J Appl Sports Sci Res. 1990;4:88-94.
31. Brown AB, McCartney N, Sale DG. Positive adaptations to
weight-lifting training in the elderly. J Appl Physiol. 1990;
69:1725-33.
32. Calder AW, Chilibeck PD, Webber CE, Sale DG. Comparison of
whole and split weight training routines in young women. Can J
Appl Physiol. 1994;19:185–99.
33. Campos GE, Luecke TJ, Wendeln HK, et al. Muscular
adaptations in response to three different resistance-training
regimens: specificity of repetition maximum training zones. Eur
J Appl Physiol. 2002;88:50–60.
34. Candow DG, Burke DG. Effect of short-term equal-volume
resistance training with different workout frequency on muscle
mass and strength in untrained men and women. J Strength
Cond Res. 2007;21:204-7.
35. Capen EK. Study of four programs of heavy resistance
exercises for development of muscular strength. Res Q.
1956;27:132-42.
36. Charette SL, McEvoy L, Pyka G, et al. Muscle hypertrophy
response to resistance training in older women. J Appl Physiol.
1991;70:1912–6.
37. Chilibeck PD, Calder AW, Sale DG, Webber CE. A comparison
of strength and muscle mass increases during resistance training
in young women. Eur J Appl Physiol. 1998;77:170–5.
38. Chu E. The effect of systematic weight training on athletic
power. Res Q. 1950;21:188-94.
39. Coburn JW, Housh TJ, Malek MH, et al. Neuromuscular
responses to three days of velocity-specific isokinetic training.
J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:892-8.
40. Coleman AE. Nautilus vs universal gym strength training in
adult males. Am Correct Ther J. 1977;31:103-7.
41. Cormie P, McBride JM, McCaulley GO. Validation of power
measurement techniques in dynamic lower body resistance
exercises. J Appl Biomech. 2007;23:103-18.
42. Cormie P, McCaulley GO, McBride JM. Power versus strength-
power jump squat training: influence on the load-power
relationship. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39:996-1003.
43. Cormie P, Deane R, McBride JM. Methodological concerns for
determining power output in the jump squat. J Strength Cond
Res. 2007;21:424-30.
44. Coyle EF, Feiring DC, Rotkis TC, et al. Specificity of power
improvements through slow and fast isokinetic training. J Appl
Physiol. 1981;51:1437-42.
45. Cressey EM, West CA, Tiberio DP, Kraemer WJ, Maresh CM.
The effects of ten weeks of lower-body unstable surface training
on markers of athletic performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;
21:561-7.
46. Cronin JB, Hansen KT. Strength and power predictors of sports
speed. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:349–57.
47. Cronin J, McNair PJ, Marshall RN. The effects of bungy weight
training on muscle function and functional performance. J Sports
Sci. 2003;21:59-71.
48. Cronin J, McNair PJ, Marshall RN. Force-velocity analysis of
strength-training techniques and load: implications for training
strategy and research. J Strength Cond Res. 2003;17:148-55.
49. Cureton KJ, Collins MA, Hill DW, McElhannon FM. Muscle
hypertrophy in men and women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1988;
20:338-44.
50. Deane RS, Chow JW, Tillman MD, Fournier KA. Effects of hip
flexor training on sprint, shuttle run, and vertical jump
performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:615-21.
51. Delecluse C. Influence of strength training on sprint running
performance: current findings and implications for training.
Sports Med. 1997;24:147-56.
52. Delecluse C, Coppenolle HV, Willems E, et al. Influence of
high-resistance and high velocity training on sprint performance.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1995;27:1203-9.
53. De Vos NJ, Singh NA, Ross DA, et al. Optimal load for in-
creasing muscle power during explosive resistance training in
older adults. J Gerontol. 2005;60A:638-47.
54. Dolezal BA, Potteiger JA. Concurrent resistance and endurance
training influence basal metabolic rate in nondieting individuals.
J Appl Physiol. 1998;85:695–700.
55. Dudley GA, Djamil R. Incompatibility of endurance- and
strength-training modes of exercise. J Appl Physiol. 1985;
59:1446-51.
56. Dudley GA, Tesch PA, Miller BJ, Buchanan MD. Importance of
eccentric actions in performance adaptations to resistance
training. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1991;62:543–50.
57. Earles DR, Judge JO, Gunnarsson OT. Velocity training induces
power-specific adaptations in highly functioning older adults.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82:872-8.
58. Ebbeling CB, Clarkson PM. Exercise-induced muscle damage
and adaptation. Sports Med. 1989;7:207-34.
59. Ebben WP, Kindler AG, Chirdon KA, et al. The effect of high-
load vs. high-repetition training on endurance performance. J
Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:513–7.
60. Elliott BC, Wilson GJ, Kerr GK. A biomechanical analysis of
the sticking region in the bench press. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
1989;21:450-62.
61. Evans WJ. Exercise training guidelines for the elderly. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1999;31:12–7.
62. Ewart CK. Psychological effects of resistive weight training: impli-
cations for cardiac patients. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1989;21:683–8.
63. Ewing JL, Wolfe DR, Rogers MA, Amundson ML, Stull GA.
Effects of velocity of isokinetic training on strength, power, and
quadriceps muscle fibre characteristics. Eur J Appl Physiol.
1990;61:159–62.
64. Farthing JP, Chilibeck PD. The effects of eccentric and
concentric training at different velocities on muscle hypertrophy.
Eur J Appl Physiol. 2003;89:578–86.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
702
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

65. Fatouros IG, Tournis S, Leontsini D, et al. Leptin and adi-
ponectin responses in overweight and inactive elderly following
resistance training and detraining are intensity related. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:5970–7.
66. Fatouros IG, Kambas A, Katrabasas I, et al. Resistance train-
ing and detraining effects on flexibility performance in the elderly
are intensity-dependent. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:634-42.
67. Fees M, Decker T, Snyder-Mackler L, Axe MJ. Upper extremity
weight-training modifications for the injured athlete: a clinical
perspective. Am J Sports Med. 1998;26:732–42.
68. Feigenbaum MS, Pollock ML. Prescription of resistance training
for health and disease. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999;31:38–45.
69. Fiatarone MA, Evans WJ. The etiology and reversibility of
muscle dysfunction in the aged. J Gerontol. 1993;48:77–83.
70. Fielding RA, Lebrasseur NK, Cuoco A, et al. High-velocity
resistance training increases skeletal muscle peak power in older
women. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50:655-62.
71. Finer JT, Simmons RM, Spudich JA. Single myosin molecule
mechanics: piconewton forces and nanometre steps. Nature.
1994;368:113-9.
72. Fleck SJ. Cardiovascular adaptations to resistance training. Med
Sci Sports Exerc. 1988;20:S146-51.
73. Fleck SJ, Smith SL, Craib MW, et al. Upper extremity isokinetic
torque and throwing velocity in team handball. J Appl Sport Sci
Res. 1992;6:120-4.
74. Fleck SJ. Periodized strength training: a critical review. J
Strength Cond Res. 1999;13:82–9.
75. Fleck SJ, Kraemer WJ. Designing Resistance Training Pro-
grams. 2nd ed. Champaign (IL): Human Kinetics Books; 1997.
p. 1-115.
76. Focht BC. Perceived exertion and training load during self-
selected and imposed-intensity resistance exercise in untrained
women. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21:183-7.
77. Frontera WR, Hughes VA, Lutz KJ, Evans WJ. A cross-
sectional study of muscle strength and mass in 45- to 78-yr-old
men and women. J Appl Physiol. 1991;71:644–50.
78. Fry AC, Kraemer WJ, Weseman CA, et al. The effects of an off-
season strength and conditioning program on starters and non-
starters in women's intercollegiate volleyball. J Appl Sport Sci
Res. 1991;5:174-81.
79. Fry AC, Kraemer WJ. Resistance exercise overtraining and
overreaching. Neuroendocrine responses. Sports Med. 1997;
23:106-29.
80. Fujita S, Dreyer HC, Drummond MJ, et al. Nutrient signaling in
the regulation of human muscle protein synthesis. J Physiol.
2007;582:813-23.
81. Galvão DA, Taaffe DR. Resistance exercise dosage in older
adults: single- versus multiset effects on physical performance
and body composition. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53:2090–7.
82. Garhammer J, Gregor R. Propulsion forces as a function of
intensity for weightlifting and vertical jumping. J Appl Sports
Sci Res. 1992;6:129-34.
83. Gibala MJ, MacDougall JD, Tarnopolsky MA, Stauber WT,
Elorriaga A. Changes in skeletal muscle ultrastructure and force
production after acute resistance exercise. J Appl Physiol.
1995;78:702-8.
84. Gibala MJ, Interisano SA, Tarnopolsky MA, et al. Myofibrillar
disruption following acute concentric and eccentric resistance
exercise in strength-trained men. Can J Physiol Pharmacol.
2000;78:656-61.
85. Gillam GM. Effects of frequency of weight training on muscle
strength enhancement. J Sports Med. 1981;21:432–6.
86. Girold S, Maurin D, Dugue B, Chatard JC, Millet G. Effects
of dry-land vs. resisted- and assisted-sprint exercises on
swimming sprint performances. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;
21:599-605.
87. Glass S, Stanton D. Self-selected resistance training intensity in
novice weightlifters. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:324–7.
88. Glowacki SP, Martin SE, Maurer A, et al. Effects of resistance,
endurance, and concurrent exercise on training outcomes in men.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2004;36:2119–27.
89. Goldberg AP. Aerobic and resistive exercise modify risk fac-
tors for coronary heart disease. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1989;
21:669-74.
90. Gonzalez-Badillo JJ, Gorostiaga EM, Arellano R, Izquierdo M.
Moderate resistance training volume produces more favor-
able strength gains than high or low volumes during a
short-term training cycle. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:
689-97.
91. Goto K, Nagasawa M, Yanagisawa O, et al. Muscular
adaptations to combinations of high- and low-intensity resis-
tance exercises. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:730–7.
92. Gotshalk LA, Loebel CC, Nindl BC, et al. Hormonal responses
to multiset versus single-set heavy-resistance exercise protocols.
Can J Appl Physiol. 1997;22:244–55.
93. Graves JE, Pollock ML, Leggett SH, et al. Effect of reduced
training frequency on muscular strength. Int J Sports Med.
1988;9:316-9.
94. Graves JE, Pollock ML, Jones AE, Colvin AB, Leggett SH.
Specificity of limited range of motion variable resistance
training. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1989;21:84-9.
95. Gulch RW. Force-velocity relations in human skeletal muscle.
Int J Sports Med. 1994;15(Suppl):S2-10.
96. Häkkinen K, Alen M, Komi PV. Changes in isometric force-and
relaxation-time, electromyographic and muscle fibre character-
istics of human skeletal muscle during strength training and
detraining. Acta Physiol Scand. 1985;125:573–85.
97. Häkkinen K, Komi PV, Alen M. Effect of explosive type
strength training on isometric force-and relaxation-time,
electromyographic and muscle fibre characteristics of leg
extensor muscles. Acta Physiol Scand. 1985;125:587-600.
98. Häkkinen K, Komi PV. Changes in electrical and mechanical
behavior of leg extensor muscles during heavy resistance
strength training. Scand J Sports Sci. 1985;7:55-64.
99. Häkkinen K, Komi PV. The effect of explosive type strength
training on electromyographic and force production character-
istics of leg extensor muscles during concentric and various
stretch-shortening cycle exercises. Scand J Sports Sci. 1985;
7:65-76.
100. Häkkinen K, Pakarinen A, Alen M, Kauhanen H, Komi PV.
Relationships between training volume, physical performance
capacity, and serum hormone concentrations during prolonged
training in elite weight lifters. Int J Sports Med. 1987;
8(Suppl):61-5.
101. Häkkinen K, Pakarinen A, Alen M, Kauhanen H, Komi PV.
Neuromuscular and hormonal adaptations in athletes to strength
training in two years. J Appl Physiol. 1988;65:2406-12.
102. Häkkinen K, Pakarinen A, Alen M, Kauhanen H, Komi PV.
Neuromuscular and hormonal responses in elite athletes to two
successive strength training sessions in one day. Eur J Appl
Physiol. 1988;57:133–9.
103. Häkkinen K, Kallinen M. Distribution of strength training
volume into one or two daily sessions and neuromuscular adap-
tations in female athletes. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol.
1994;34:117-24.
104. Häkkinen K, Häkkinen A. Neuromuscular adaptations during
intensive strength training in middle-aged and elderly males and
females. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1995;35:137–47.
105. Häkkinen K, Kallinen M, Izquierdo M, et al. Changes in agonist-
antagonist EMG, muscle CSA, and force during strength training
in middle-aged and older people. J Appl Physiol. 1998;84:
1341-9.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise Ⓡ 703
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

106. Häkkinen K, Newton RU, Gordon SE, et al. Changes in muscle
morphology, electromyographic activity, and force production
characteristics during progressive strength training in young and
older men. J Gerontol. 1998;53A:B415-23.
107. Häkkinen K, Kraemer WJ, Newton RU, Alen M. Changes in
electromyographic activity, muscle fibre and force production
characteristics during heavy resistance/power strength training in
middle-aged and older men and women. Acta Physiol Scand.
2001;171:51-62.
108. Harber MP, Fry AC, Rubin MR, Smith JC, Weiss LW. Skeletal
muscle and hormonal adaptations to circuit weight training in
untrained men. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2004;14:176–85.
109. Harris C, Debeliso MA, Spitzer-Gibson TA, Adams KJ. The
effect of resistance-training intensity on strength-gain response in
the older adult. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:833–8.
110. Hass CJ, Garzarella L, Dehoyos D, Pollock ML. Single versus
multiple sets and long-term recreational weightlifters. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2000;32:235-42.
111. Hatfield DL, Kraemer WJ, Spiering BA, et al. The impact of
velocity of movement on performance factors in resistance
exercise. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:760-6.
112. Hather BM, Tesch PA, Buchanan P, Dudley GA. Influence of
eccentric actions on skeletal muscle adaptations to resistance
training. Acta Physiol Scand. 1991;143:177–85.
113. Hay JG, Andrews JG, Vaughan CL. Effects of lifting rate on
elbow torques exerted during arm curl exercises. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 1983;15:63-71.
114. Henneman E, Somjen G, Carpenter D. Functional significance
of cell size in spinal motoneurons. J Neurophysiol. 1965; 28:
560-80.
115. Henwood TR, Taaffe DR. Improved physical performance in
older adults undertaking a short-term programme of high-
velocity resistance training. Gerontol. 2005;51:108-15.
116. Hickson RC, Hidaka K, Foster C. Skeletal muscle fiber type,
resistance training, and strength-related performance. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1994;26:593-8.
117. Hoff J, Almasbakk B. The effects of maximum strength training
on throwing velocity and muscle strength in female team-
handball players. J Strength Cond Res. 1995;9:255–8.
118. Hoffman JR, Kraemer WJ, Fry AC, Deschenes M, Kemp DM.
The effect of self-selection for frequency of training in a winter
conditioning program for football. J Appl Sport Sci Res. 1990;
3:76-82.
119. Hoffman JR, Maresh CM, Armstrong LE, Kraemer WJ. Effects
of off-season and in-season resistance training programs on a
collegiate male basketball team. J Hum Muscle Perform. 1991;
1:48-55.
120. Hoffman JR, Cooper J, Wendell M, Kang J. Comparison of
Olympic vs. traditional power lifting training programs in
football players. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:129–35.
121. Hoffman JR, Ratamess NA, Cooper JJ, et al. Comparison of
loaded and unloaded jump squat training on strength/power
performance in college football players. J Strength Cond Res.
2005;19:810-5.
122. Hortobagyi T, Barrier J, Beard D, et al. Greater initial adap-
tations to submaximal muscle lengthening than maximal short-
ening. J Appl Physiol. 1996;81:1677–82.
123. Housh DJ, Housh TJ, Johnson GO, Chu WK. Hypertrophic
response to unilateral concentric isokinetic resistance training. J
Appl Physiol. 1992;73:65–70.
124. Hruda KV, Hicks AL, McCartney N. Training for muscle power
in older adults: effects on functional abilities. Can J Appl
Physiol. 2003;28:178–89.
125. Huczel HA, Clarke DH. A comparison of strength and muscle
endurance in strength-trained and untrained women. Eur J Appl
Physiol. 1992;64:467-70.
126. Humburg H, Baars H, Schröder J, Reer R, Braumann KM. 1-Set
vs. 3-set resistance training: a crossover study. J Strength Cond
Res. 2007;21:578–82.
127. Hunter GR. Changes in body composition, body build, and
performance associated with different weight training frequen-
cies in males and females. NSCA J. 1985;7:26–8.
128. Hunter GR, Wetzstein CJ, McLafferty CL, et al. High-resistance
versus variable-resistance training in older adults. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2001;33:1759-64.
129. Hunter GR, Seelhorst D, Snyder S. Comparison of metabolic and
heart rate responses to super slow vs. traditional resistance
training. J Strength Cond Res. 2003;17:76-81.
130. Hurley BF, Kokkinos PF. Effects of weight training on
risk factors for coronary heart disease. Sports Med. 1987;4:
231-8.
131. Jackson A, Jackson T, Hnatek J, West J. Strength development:
using functional isometrics in an isotonic strength training
program. Res Q Exerc Sport. 1985;56:234–7.
132. Jacobson BH. A comparison of two progressive weight training
techniques on knee extensor strength. J Athl Train. 1986;
21:315-9.
133. Jones K, Hunter G, Fleisig G, Escamilla R, Lemak L. The ef-
fects of compensatory acceleration on upper-body strength and
power in collegiate football players. J Strength Cond Res. 1999;
13:99-105.
134. Jung AP. The impact of resistance training on distance running
performance. Sports Med. 2003;33:539-52.
135. Kalapotharakos V, Michalopoulos M, Godolias G, et al.
The effects of high- and moderate-resistance training on
muscle function in the elderly. J Aging Phys Act. 2004;11:
131-43.
136. Kalapotharakos V, Michalopoulos M, Tokmakidis SP, Godolias
G, Gourgoulis V. Effects of a heavy and a moderate resistance
training on functional performance in older adults. J Strength
Cond Res. 2005;19:652-7.
137. Kanehisa H, Miyashita M. Specificity of velocity in strength
training. Eur J Appl Physiol. 1983;52:104–6.
138. Kawakami Y, Abe T, Fukunaga T. Muscle-fiber pennation
angles are greater in hypertrophied than in normal muscles. J
Appl Physiol. 1993;74:2740-4.
139. Kawamori N, Haff GG. The optimal training load for the
development of muscular power. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;
18:675-84.
140. Kawamori N, Crum AJ, Blumert PA, et al. Influence of different
relative intensities on power output during the hang power clean:
identification of the optimal load. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;
19:698-708.
141. Keeler LK, Finkelstein LH, Miller W, Fernhall B. Early-phase
adaptations of traditional-speed vs. superslow resistance training
on strength and aerobic capacity in sedentary individuals. J
Strength Cond Res. 2001;15:309–14.
142. Kemmler WK, Lauber D, Engelke K, Weineck J. Effects of
single- vs. multiple-set resistance training on maximum strength
and body composition in trained postmenopausal women. J
Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:689–94.
143. Keogh JWL, Wilson GJ, Weatherby RP. A cross-sectional
comparison of different resistance training techniques in the
bench press. J Strength Cond Res. 1999;13:247–58.
144. Kibler WB, Press J, Sciascia A. The role of core stability in
athletic function. Sports Med. 2006;36:189–98.
145. Knapik JJ, Mawdsley RH, Ramos MU. Angular specificity and
test mode specificity of isometric and isokinetic strength training.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1983;5:58–65.
146. Koffler KH, Menkes A, Redmond RA, et al. Strength training
accelerates gastrointestinal transit in middle-aged and older men.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1992;24:415–9.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
704
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

147. Komi PV, Kaneko M, Aura O. EMG activity of leg extensor
muscles with special reference to mechanical efficiency in
concentric and eccentric exercise. Int J Sports Med. 1987;
8(Suppl):22-9.
148. Kosek DJ, Kim JS, Petrella JK, Cross JM, Bamman MM.
Efficacy of 3 days/wk resistance training on myofiber hypertro-
phy and myogenic mechanisms in young vs. older adults. J Appl
Physiol. 2006;101:531-54.
149. Kraemer WJ. A series of studies-the physiological basis for
strength training in American football: fact over philosophy. J
Strength Cond Res. 1997;11:131-42.
150. Kraemer WJ, Noble BJ, Clark MJ, Culver BW. Physiologic
responses to heavy-resistance exercise with very short rest
periods. Int J Sports Med. 1987;8:247–52.
151. Kraemer WJ, Marchitelli L, Gordon SE, et al. Hormonal and
growth factor responses to heavy resistance exercise protocols. J
Appl Physiol. 1990;69:1442-50.
152. Kraemer WJ, Gordon SE, Fleck SJ, et al. Endogenous anabolic
hormonal and growth factor responses to heavy resistance exer-
cise in males and females. Int J Sports Med. 1991;12:228–35.
153. Kraemer WJ, Fleck SJ, Dziados JE, et al. Changes in hormonal
concentrations after different heavy-resistance exercise protocols
in women. J Appl Physiol. 1993;75:594–604.
154. Kraemer WJ, Häkkinen K, Newton RU, et al. Effects of heavy-
resistance training on hormonal response patterns in younger vs.
older men. J Appl Physiol. 1999;87:982–92.
155. Kraemer WJ, Ratamess N, Fry AC, et al. Influence of resistance
training volume and periodization on physiological and perfor-
mance adaptations in college women tennis players. Am J Sports
Med. 2000;28:626–33.
156. Kraemer WJ, Nindl BC, RatamessNA, et al. Changes in muscle
hypertrophy in women with periodized resistance training. Med
Sci Sports Exerc. 2004;36:697–708.
157. Kraemer WJ, RatamessNA. Fundamentals of resistance training:
progression and exercise prescription. Med Sci Sport Exerc.
2004;36:674-8.
158. Kraemer WJ, RatamessNA. Hormonal responses and adaptations
to resistance exercise and training. Sports Med. 2005;35:339–61.
159. Kraemer WJ, Spiering BA, Volek JS, et al. Androgenic re-
sponses to resistance exercise: effects of feeding and L-carnitine.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:1288–96.
160. Kramer JB, Stone MH, O'Bryant HS, et al. Effects of single vs.
multiple sets of weight training: impact of volume, intensity, and
variation. J Strength Cond Res. 1997;11:143–7.
161. Lachance PF, Hortobagyi T. Influence of cadence on muscular
performance during push-up and pull-up exercises. J Strength
Cond Res. 1994;8:76-9.
162. Lachowetz T, Evon J, Pastiglione J. The effect of an upper body
strength program on intercollegiate baseball throwing velocity. J
Strength Cond Res. 1998;12:116-9.
163. Layne JE, Nelson ME. The effect of progressive resistance
training on bone density: a review. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999;
31:25-30.
164. Lexell J, Downham D. What is the effect of aging on type 2
muscle fibers? J Neurol Sci. 1992;107:250-1.
165. Linnamo V, Pakarinen A, Komi PV, Kraemer WJ, Häkkinen K.
Acute hormonal responses to submaximal and maximal heavy
resistance and explosive exercises in men and women. J Strength
Cond Res. 2005;19:566-71.
166. MacDougall JD, Gibala MJ, Tarnopolsky MA, et al. The time
course for elevated muscle protein synthesis following heavy
resistance exercise. Can J Appl Physiol. 1995;20:480–6.
167. Marcinik EJ, Hodgdon JA, Mittleman K, O'Brien JJ. Aerobic/
calisthenic and aerobic/circuit weight training programs for
Navy men: a comparative study. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1985;
17:482-7.
168. Marcovic G. Poor relationship between strength and power
qualities and agility performance. J Sports Med Phys Fitness.
2007;47:276–83.
169. Marx JO, Ratamess NA, Nindl BC, et al. The effects of single-
set vs. periodized multiple-set resistance training on muscular
performance and hormonal concentrations in women. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2001;33:635–43.
170. Mayhew JL, Gross PM. Body composition changes in young
women with high resistance training. Res Q. 1974;45:433-40.
171. Maynard J, Ebben WP. The effects of antagonist prefatigue on
agonist torque and electromyography. J Strength Cond Res.
2003;17:469-74.
172. Mazzetti SA, Kraemer WJ, Volek JS, et al. The influence of
direct supervision of resistance training on strength performance.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32:1175–84.
173. Mazzetti S, Douglass M, Yocum A, Harber M. Effect
of explosive versus slow contractions and exercise inten-
sity on energy expenditure. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;
39:1291-301.
174. McBride JM, Triplett-McBride T, Davie A, Newton RU. The
effect of heavy- vs. light-load jump squats on the development
of strength, power, and speed. J Strength Cond Res. 2002;
16:75-82.
175. McBride JM, Blaak JB, Triplett-McBride T. Effect of resistance
exercise volume and complexity on EMG, strength, and regional
body composition. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2003;90:626-32.
176. McCall GE, Byrnes WC, Dickinson A, Pattany PM, Fleck SJ.
Muscle fiber hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and capillary density in
college men after resistance training. J Appl Physiol. 1996;
81:2004-12.
177. McCall GE, Byrnes WC, Fleck SJ, Dickinson A, Kraemer WJ.
Acute and chronic hormonal responses to resistance training
designed to promote muscle hypertrophy. Can J Appl Physiol.
1999;24:96-107.
178. McCaw ST, Friday JJ. A comparison of muscle activity between
a free weight and machine bench press. J Strength Cond Res.
1994;8:259–64.
179. McCurdy KW, Langford GA, Doscher MW, Wiley LP, Mallard
KG. The effects of short-term unilateral and bilateral lower-body
resistance training on measures of strength and power. J Strength
Cond Res. 2005;19:9-15.
180. McEvoy KP, Newton RU. Baseball throwing speed and base
running speed: the effects of ballistic resistance training. J
Strength Cond Res. 1998;12:216–21.
181. McGill SM. Low back stability: from formal description to
issues for performance and rehabilitation. Exerc Sports Sci Rev.
2001;29:26-31.
182. Deleted in proof.
183. McLester JR, Bishop P, Guilliams ME. Comparison of 1 day and
3 days per week of equal-volume resistance training in
experienced subjects. J Strength Cond Res. 2000;14:273–81.
184. Miller WJ, Sherman WM, Ivy JL. Effect of strength training on
glucose tolerance and post-glucose insulin response. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1984;16:539-43.
185. Miszko TA, Cress ME, Slade JM, et al. Effect of strength and
power training on physical function in community-dwelling
older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2003;58:171-5.
186. Moffroid M, Whipple RH. Specificity of speed of exercise. Phys
Ther. 1970;50:1692-700.
187. Mookerjee S, Ratamess NA. Comparison of strength differences
and joint action durations between full and partial range-of-motion
bench press exercise. J Strength Cond Res. 1999;13:76–81.
188. Moritani T, DeVries H. Neural factors vs hypertrophy in the
time course of muscle strength gain. Am J Phys Med. 1979;58:
115-30.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise ® 705
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

189. Morrissey MC, Harman EA, Frykman PN, Han KH. Early phase
differential effects of slow and fast barbell squat training. Am J
Sports Med. 1998;26:221-30.
190. Moss BM, Refsnes PE, Abildgaard A, Nicolaysen K, Jensen J.
Effects of maximal effort strength training with different loads
on dynamic strength, cross-sectional area, load-power and load-
velocity relationships. Eur J Appl Physiol. 1997;75:193–9.
191. Mulligan SE, Fleck SJ, Gordon SE, et al. Influence of resistance
exercise volume on serum growth hormone and cortisol concen-
trations in women. J Strength Cond Res. 1996;10:256–62.
192. Munn J, Herbert RD, Hancock MJ, Gandevia SC. Resistance
training for strength: effect of number of sets and contraction
speed. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005;37:1622-6.
193. Nakamura Y, Tanaka K, Yabushita N, Sakai T, Shigematsu R.
Effects of exercise frequency on functional fitness in older adult
women. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2007;44:163-73.
194. National Institutes of Health and National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Clinical guidelines on the identification,
evaluation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in
adults: the Evidence Report. NIH Publication 98-4093.
1998;288 p.
195. Neils CM, Uderman BE, Brice GA, Winchester JB, McGuigan
MR. Influence of contraction velocity in untrained individuals
over the initial early phase of resistance training. J Strength
Cond Res. 2005;19:883–7.
196. Newton RU, McEvoy KP. Baseball throwing velocity: A
comparison of medicine ball training and weight training. J
Strength Cond Res. 1994;8:198–203.
197. Newton RU, Kraemer WJ, Häkkinen K, Humphries BJ, Murphy
AJ. Kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activation during explosive
upper body movements. J Appl Biomech. 1996;12:31-43.
198. Newton RU, Kraemer WJ, Häkkinen K. Short-term ballistic
resistance training in the pre-season preparation of elite volley-
ball players. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999;31:323–30.
199. Newton RU, Häkkinen K, Häkkinen A, et al. Mixed-methods
resistance training increases power and strength of young and
older men. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;34:1367-75.
200. Orr R, DeVos NJ, Singh NA, et al. Power training improves
balance in healthy older adults. J Gerontol. 2006;61A:78–85.
201. O'Shea P. Effects of selected weight training programs on the
development of strength and muscle hypertrophy. Res Q. 1966;
37:95-102.
202. Ostrowski KJ, Wilson GJ, Weatherby R, Murphy PW, Lyttle
AD. The effect of weight training volume on hormonal output
and muscular size and function. J Strength Cond Res. 1997;
11:148-54.
203. Paulsen G, Myklestad D, Raastad T. The influence of volume of
exercise on early adaptations to strength training. J Strength
Cond Res. 2003;17:115-20.
204. Pedegna LR, Elsner RC, Roberts D, Lang J, Farewell V. The
relationship of upper extremity strength to throwing speed. Am J
Sports Med. 1982;10:352-4.
205. Perrine JJ, Edgerton VR. Muscle force-velocity and power-
velocity relationships under isokinetic loading. Med Sci Sports.
1978;10:159–66.
206. Peterson MD, Rhea MR, Alvar BA. Maximizing strength
development in athletes: a meta-analysis to determine the dose-
response relationship. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:377–82.
207. Peterson MD, Rhea MR, Alvar BA. Applications of the dose-
response for muscular strength development: a review of meta-
analytic efficacy and reliability for designing training prescrip-
tion. J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:950–8.
208. Peterson MD, Alvar BA, Rhea MR. The contribution of maximal
force production to explosive movement among young collegiate
athletes. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:867-73.
209. Peterson MD, Dodd DJ, Alvar BA, Rhea MR, Favre M.
Undulation training for development of hierarchical fitness and
improved firefighter job performance. J Strength Cond Res.
2008;22:1683-95.
210. Phillips S, Tipton K, Aarsland A, Wolf S, Wolfe R. Mixed
muscle protein synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise
in humans. Am J Physiol. 1997;273:E99–107.
211. Phillips SM. Short-term training: when do repeated bouts of
resistance exercise become training? Can J Appl Physiol.
2000;25:185-93.
212. Pijnappels M, van der Burg JCE, Reeves ND, van Dieen JH.
Identification of elderly fallers by muscle strength measures. Eur
J Appl Physiol. 2008;102:585–92.
213. Pincivero DM, Lephart SM, Karunakara RG. Effects of rest
interval on isokinetic strength and functional performance after
short term high intensity training. Br J Sports Med.
1997;31:229–34.
214. Pincivero DM, Campy RM. The effects of rest interval length
and training on quadriceps femoris muscle. Part I: knee extensor
torque and muscle fatigue. J Sports Med Phys Fitness.
2004;44:111-8.
215. Ploutz LL, Tesch PA, Biro RL, Dudley GA. Effect of resistance
training on muscle use during exercise. J Appl Physiol. 1994;
76:1675-81.
216. Podolosky A, Kaufman KR, Cahalan TD, Aleskinsky SY, Chao
EY. The relationship of strength and jump height in figure
skaters. Am J Sports Med. 1990;18:400–5.
217. Pollock ML, Graves JE, Bamman MM, et al. Frequency and
volume of resistance training: effect of cervical extension
strength. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1993;74:1080-6.
218. Poulmedis P, Rondoyannis G, Mitsou A, Tsarouchas E. The in-
fluence of isokinetic muscle torque exerted in various speeds of
soccer ball velocity. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1988;10:93-6.
219. Raastad T, Bjoro T, Hallen J. Hormonal responses to high- and
moderate-intensity strength exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol.
2000;82:121-8.
220. Ratamess NA, Kraemer WJ, Volek JS, et al. Androgen receptor
content following heavy resistance exercise in men. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol. 2005;93:35-42.
221. Ratamess NA, Falvo MJ, Mangine GT, et al. The effect of rest
interval length on metabolic responses to the bench press
exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007;100:1-17.
222. Ratamess NA, Faigenbaum AD, Hoffman JR, Kang J. Self-
selected resistance training intensity in healthy women: the
influence of a personal trainer. J Strength Cond Res. 2008;
22:103-11.
223. Rhea MR, Alderman BL. A meta-analysis of periodized versus
nonperiodized strength and power training programs. Res Q
Exerc Sport. 2004;75:413-22.
224. Rhea MR, Alvar BA, Burkett LN. Single versus multiple sets for
strength: a meta-analysis to address the controversy. Res Q Sport
Exerc. 2002;73:485–8.
225. Rhea MR, Alvar BA, Burkett LN, Ball SD. A meta-analysis to
determine the dose response for strength development. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2003;35:456–64.
226. Rhea MR, Ball SD, Phillips WT, Burkett LN. A comparison of
linear and daily undulating periodized programs with equated
volume and intensity for strength. J Strength Cond Res.
2002;16:250-5.
227. Rhea MR, Phillips WT, Burkett LN, et al. A comparison of
linear and daily undulating periodized programs with equated
volume and intensity for local muscular endurance. J Strength
Cond Res. 2003;17:82-7.
228. Rhea MR, Alvar BA, Ball SD, Burkett LN. Three sets of weight
training superior to 1 set with equal intensity for eliciting
strength. J Strength Cond Res. 2002;16:525-9.
229. Richmond SR, Godard MP. The effects of varied rest periods
between sets to failure using the bench press in recreationally
trained men. J Strength Cond Res. 2004;18:846–9.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
706
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org

230. Robinson JM, Stone MH, Johnson RL, et al. Effects of different
weight training exercise/rest intervals on strength, power, and
high intensity exercise endurance. J Strength Cond Res. 1995;
9:216-21.
231. Rønnestad BR, Egeland W, Kvamme NH, et al. Dissimilar ef-
fects of one- and three-set strength training on strength and
muscle mass gains in upper and lower body in untrained
subjects. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21:157-63.
232. Roth SM, Ferrell RE, Peters DG, et al. Influence of age, sex, and
strength training on human muscle gene expression determined
by microarray. Physiol Genomics. 2002;10:181-90.
233. Roth SM, Martel GF, Ferrell RE, et al. Myostatin gene
expression is reduced in humans with heavy-resistance
strength training: a brief communication. Exp Biol Med.
2003;228:706-9.
234. Sakamoto A, Sinclair PJ. Effect of movement velocity on the
relationship between training load and the number of repetitions
of bench press. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20:523-7.
235. Sale DG. Neural adaptations to strength training. In: Komi PV,
editor. Strength and Power in Sport. Oxford: Blackwell
Scientific; 1992. p. 249–65.
236. Sale DG, Jacobs I, MacDougall JD, Garner S. Comparisons of
two regimens of concurrent strength and endurance training. Med
Sci Sports Exerc. 1990;22:348–56.
237. Sanborn K, Boros R, Hruby J, et al. Short-term performance
effects of weight training with multiple sets not to failure vs a
single set to failure in women. J Strength Cond Res. 2000;
14:328-31.
238. Schlumberger A, Stec J, Schmidtbleicher D. Single- vs. multiple-
set strength training in women. J Strength Cond Res. 2001;
15:284-9.
239. Selye H. Forty years of stress research: principal remaining prob-
lems and misconceptions. Can Med Assoc J. 1976;115:53–6.
240. Sforzo GA, Touey PR. Manipulating exercise order affects
muscular performance during a resistance exercise training
session. J Strength Cond Res. 1996;10:20–4.
241. Shepstone TN, Tang JE, Dallaire S, et al. Short-term high- vs.
low-velocity isokinetic lengthening training results in greater
hypertrophy of the elbow flexors in young men. J Appl Physiol.
2005;98:1768-76.
242. Shinohara M, Kouzaki M, Yoshihisa T, Fukunaga T. Efficacy of
tourniquet ischemia for strength training with low resistance. Eur
J Appl Physiol. 1998;77:189–91.
243. Signorile JF, Carmel MP, Lai S, Roos BA. Early plateaus of
power and torque gains during high- and low-speed resistance
training of older women. J Appl Physiol. 2005;98:1213-20.
244. Simao R, Farinatti PTV, Polito MD, Maior AS, Fleck SJ.
Influence of exercise order on the number of repetitions
performed and perceived exertion during resistive exercises. J
Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:152–6.
245. Simao R, Farinatti PTV, Polito MD, Viveiros L, Fleck SJ.
Influence of exercise order on the number of repetitions
performed and perceived exertion during resistance exercise in
women. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21:23-8.
246. Skelton DA, Greig CA, Davies JM, Young A. Strength, power
and related functional ability of healthy people aged 65-89
years. Age Aging. 1994;23:371–7.
247. Spreuwenberg LP, Kraemer WJ, Spiering BA, et al. Influence of
exercise order in a resistance-training exercise session. J Strength
Cond Res. 2006;20:141-4.
248. Starkey DB, Pollock ML, Ishida Y, et al. Effect of resistance
training volume on strength and muscle thickness. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1996;28:1311-20.
249. Staron RS, Leonardi MJ, Karapondo DL, et al. Strength and
skeletal muscle adaptations in heavy-resistance-trained women
after detraining and retraining. J Appl Physiol. 1991;70:631-40.
250. Staron RS, Karapondo DL, Kraemer WJ, et al. Skeletal muscle
adaptations during early phase of heavy-resistance training in
men and women. J Appl Physiol. 1994;76:1247-55.
251. Stone MH, Johnson RL, Carter DR. A short term comparison of
two different methods of resistance training on leg strength and
power. J Athl Train. 1979;14:158–61.
252. Stone MH, O'Bryant H, Garhammer J. A hypothetical model for
strength training. J Sports Med. 1981;21:342-51.
253. Stone MH, Plisk SS, Stone ME, et al. Athletic performance
development: volume load-1 set vs. multiple sets, training
velocity and training variation. NSCA J. 1998;20:22–31.
254. Stone MH, Potteiger JA, Pierce KC, et al. Comparison of the
effects of three different weight-training programs on the one
repetition maximum squat. J Strength Cond Res. 2000;14:332–7.
255. Stone WJ, Coulter SP. Strength/endurance effects from three
resistance training protocols with women. J Strength Cond Res.
1994;8:231-4.
256. Stowers T, McMillian J, Scala D, et al. The short-term effects of
three different strength-power training methods. NSCA J.
1983;5:24-7.
257. Takeshima N, Rogers M, Watanabe E, et al. Water-based ex-
ercise improves health-related aspects of fitness in older women.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;33:544-51.
258. Tesch PA, Komi PV, Häkkinen K. Enzymatic adaptations con-
sequent to long-term strength training. Int J Sports Med. 1987;
8(Suppl):66-9.
259. Tesch PA, Thorsson A, Essen-Gustavsson B. Enzyme activities
of FT and ST muscle fibres in heavy-resistance trained athletes. J
Appl Physiol. 1989;67:83–7.
260. Thomas GA, Kraemer WJ, Spiering BA, et al. Maximal power at
different percentages of one repetition maximum: influence of
resistance and gender. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21:336-42.
261. Thompson CJ, Cobb KM, Blackwell J. Functional training im-
proves club head speed and functional fitness in older golfers.
J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21:131-7.
262. Tran QT, Docherty D, Behm D. The effects of varying time
under tension and volume load on acute neuromuscular
responses. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2006;98:402-10.
263. Tricoli V, Lamas L, Carnevale R, Ugrinowitsch C. Short-term
effects on lower-body functional power development: weightlift-
ing vs. vertical jump training programs. J Strength Cond Res.
2005;19:433-7.
264. Tsourlou T, Benik A, Dipla K, Zafeiridis A, Kellis S. The effects
of a twenty-four-week aquatic training program on muscular
strength performance in healthy elderly women. J Strength Cond
Res. 2006;20:811–8.
265. Vincent KR, Braith RW, Feldman RA, Kallas HE, Lowenthal
DT. Improved cardiorespiratory endurance following 6 months
of resistance exercise in elderly men and women. Arch Intern
Med. 2003;162:673-8.
266. Volaklis KA, Spassis AT, Tokmakidis SP. Land versus water
exercise in patients with coronary heart disease: effects on body
composition, blood lipids, and physical fitness. Am Heart J.
2007;154:560.e1-6.
267. Wang TJ, Belza B, Thompson FE, Whitney JD, Bennett K.
Effects of aquatic exercise on flexibility, strength and aerobic
fitness in adults with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. J Adv
Nurs. 2007;57:141–52.
268. Weiss LW, Coney HD, Clark FC. Differential functional
adaptations to short-term low- moderate-, and high-repetition
weight training. J Strength Cond Res. 1999;13:236-41.
269. Willardson JM, Burkett LN. A comparison of 3 different rest
intervals on the exercise volume completed during a workout. J
Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:23–6.
270. Willardson JM, Burkett LN. The effect of rest interval length on
bench press performance with heavy vs. light loads. J Strength
Cond Res. 2006;20:396–9.
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise ® 707
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PROGRESSION AND RESISTANCE TRAINING

SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS
271. Willardson JM, Burkett LN. The effect of rest interval length on
the sustainability of squat and bench press repetitions. J Strength
Cond Res. 2006;20:400-3.
272. Willoughby DS. A comparison of three selected weight training
programs on the upper and lower body strength of trained males.
Ann J Appl Res Coach Athl. 1992 Mar: 124 46.
273. Willoughby DS. The effects of meso-cycle-length weight training
programs involving periodization and partially equated volumes
on upper and lower body strength. J Strength Cond Res. 1993;
7:2-8.
274. Willoughby DSGillespie JW. A comparison of isotonic free
weights and omnikinetic exercise machines on strength. J
Human Mov Stud. 1990;19:93-100.
275. Wilmore JH, Parr RB, Girandola RN, et al. Physiological al-
terations consequent to circuit weight training. Med Sci Sports.
1978;10:79–84.
276. Wilson GJ, Newton RU, Murphy AJ, Humphries BJ.
The optimal training load for the development of dyna-
mic athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993;25:
1279-86.
277. Wilson GJ, Murphy AJ, Walshe AD. Performance benefits from
weight and plyometric training: Effects of initial strength level.
Coach Sport Sci J. 1997;2:3–8.
278. Wolfe BL, Lemura LM, Cole PJ. Quantitative analysis of single-
vs. multiple-set programs in resistance training. J Strength Cond
Res. 2004;18:35-47.
279. Woods S, Bridge T, Nelson D, Risse K, Pincivero DM. The
effects of rest interval length on ratings of perceived exertion
during dynamic knee extension exercise. J Strength Cond Res.
2004;18:540–5.
280. Zatsiorsky V, Kraemer WJ. Science and Practice of Strength
Training. 2nd ed. Champaign (IL): Human Kinetics; 2006.
708
Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine
Copyright © 2009 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
http://www.acsm-msse.org